FOREWORD This is the second iteration of preparing our own courseware material, after successful completion of a similar task undertaken a few years ago. These contents have been carefully prepared and should serve as excellent auxiliary material for both instructors and students. The Special Academic Group, Autonomy (SAGA) was formed for the sole purpose of preparing courseware contents primarily in the first-year theory subjects; a few second-year subjects were also included. The subjects for the first year were - Basic Electrical Engineering, Basic Electronics Engineering, Computer Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms, Engineering Mathematics I and II, Engineering Physics, Engineering Chemistry, Constitution of India, Environmental Science and Engineering and Communicative and Technical English. For the second year, the subjects for which courseware material was prepared were Analog Electronic Circuits, Digital Systems Design, Circuit Theory and Measurements and Instruments. Faculty members from all the departments contributed to the task. They were, in no particular order, Nalini Singh, Bimal Meher, Saumyaranjan Dash, Mukti Routray, Susmita Biswal, Manasa Dash, Bipin Tripathy, Sibasankar Nayak, Janmejay Senapati, Subrat Sahu, Pradeep Moharana, Rupambika Pattanaik, Dhananjay Tripathy, Jagadish Patra, Sachin Das, Deepak Ranjan Nayak, Amulya Roul, Bodhisattva Dash, Sanghamitra Das, Gyana Ranjan Biswal, Nibedita Swain and Rajan Mishra. The entire group worked diligently to successfully complete the task which included a peer review of the material. I take this opportunity to thank all the members of the SAGA group for a job well done. I sincerely hope that this courseware material comes in handy and is utilized to the fullest extent. These are readily available additional resources prepared in accordance with the Silicon autonomy syllabus, to complement textbooks and classroom lectures. If there are any errors, I would be grateful if they are brought to my notice so that we can correct them in subsequent versions. Dr. Jaideep Talukdar, Principal Silicon Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar December 2020 Module – 1: WATER TREATMENT Hardness: Hardness of water is a characteristic property by which water “'prevents lathering of soap”. Causes: • The hardness of water is due to presence of certain salts (mainly bicarbonates, sulphates and Chlorides) of Ca, Mg and few other heavy metal salts dissolved in water. A sample of hard water when treated with soap (sodium or potassium salt of higher fatty acid like oleic, palmitic or stearic) do not produce lather with soap, but on the other hand forms a white scum or precipitate. • The precipitate is formed due to insoluble soaps of Ca and Mg. Reactions:- 2C17H35COONa + CaCl2 → Ca(C17H35COO)2 + NaCl Sodium Stearate (Sodium soap) hardness Calcium Stearate (Insoluble) 2 C17H35COONa + MgSO4 → (C17H35COO)2Mg + Na2SO4 Magnesium Stearate (Insoluble) Thus, the water which does not produce lather with soap solution readily is called Hard water the one which lathers easily on shaking with soap solution is called soft water. Causes of Hardness: Hardness of water is due to the presence of Bicarbonates, Chlorides, Sulphates and Nitrates of Calcium and Magnesium. These soluble salts get mixed with natural water due to the following reasons: 1. When natural water containing CO2 flows over the rocks of the limestone (CaCO3) and Dolomite (CaCO3 & MgCO3), they get converted into soluble bicarbonates. Thus, water gets hardness. CaCO3 + H2O + CO2 Insoluble → Ca (HCO3)2 Soluble 2. When natural water flows over the rocks containing chlorides and sulphates and Nitrates of Calcium and magnesium, these salts dissolve in water. Thus water gets hardness. Disadvantages of Hard Water: 1. In Domestic use: > Washing: Hard water, when used for washing purposes, does not producing lather freely with soap. As a result cleaning quality of soap is decreased and a lot of it is wasted. > Bathing: Hard water does not lather freely with soap solution, but produces sticky scum on the bathtub and body. Thus, the cleaning quality of soap is depressed and a lot of it is wasted. > Cooking: The boiling point of water is increased because of presence of salts. Hence more fuel and time are required for cooking. > Drinking: Hard water causes bad effects on our digestive system. Moreover, the possibility of forming calcium oxalate crystals in urinary tracks is increased. 2. Industrial Use: > Textile Industry: Hard water causes wastage of soap. Precipitates of calcium and magnesium soaps adhere to the fabrics and cause problem. > Sugar Industry: The water which containing sulphates, nitrates, alkali carbonates are used in sugar refining, cause difficulties in the crystallization of sugar. > Dyeing Industry: The dissolved salts in hard water may reacts with costly dyes forming precipitates. > Paper Industry: Calcium, magnesium, Iron salts in water may affect the quality of paper. > Pharmaceutical Industry: Hard water may cause some undesirable products while preparation of pharmaceutical products. 3. Steam generation in Boilers: > For steam generation, boilers are almost invariably employed. If the hard water is fed directly to the boilers, there arise many troubles such as: Scales & sludges formation, Corrosion, Priming & Foaming and Caustic embrittlement. TYPES OF HARDNESS Hardness of water is mainly two types: 1. Temporary Hardness 2. Permanent Hardness 1. Temporary Hardness: Temporary Hardness mainly caused by the presence of dissolved bicarbonates of Calcium, Magnesium (Ca (HCO3)2, Mg (HCO3)2). Temporary Hardness can be largely removed by boiling of water. Ca (HCO3)2 → CaCO3 + H2O + CO2 Calcium bicarbonate Mg (HCO3)2 → Mg (OH)2 + 2CO2 Magnesium bicarbonate 2. Permanent Hardness: It is due to the presence of dissolved Chlorides, Nitrates and Sulphates of Calcium, Magnesium, Iron and other metals. Permanent hardness res ponsible salts are CaCl2,, MgCl2, CaSO4, MgSO4, FeSO4, Al2(SO4)3. Permanent Hardness cannot be removed by boiling but it can be removed by the use of chemical agents. EXPRESSION AND UNITS OF HARDNESS The expression of hardness producing salts usually expre ssed in terms of an equivalent amount of CaCO3. Calcium Carbonate is chosen as a standard because: i. ii. Its molecular weight (100) and equivalent weight (50) is a whole number, so the calculations in water analysis can be simplified. It is the most insoluble salt that can be precipitated in water treatment. The conversion of the hardness causing salts into CaCO 3 equivalents can be achieved by using the following formula: Degree of Hardness = The weight of hardness causing salts x 100 (Molecular weight of CaCO3) Units of Hardness: 1. Parts per Million (ppm): The number of parts of calcium carbonate equivalent hardness presents in 106 parts of water. 1ppm = 1 part of CaCO3 eq hardness in 106 parts of water. 2. Milligrams per litre (mg/1): The number of milligrams of calcium carbonate equivalent hardness presents in litre of water. 1 mg/L = 1 mg of CaCO3 eq hardness in 1 litre of water. But one litre of water weights =1 kg =1000g = 1000 x 1000 mg = 106 mg = 1 ppm. 3. Clark’s degree (°Cl): The number of parts of calcium carbonate equivalent hardness presents in 70,000 or (7x104) parts of water. 1° Clarke = 1 part of CaCO3 eq hardness per 70,000 parts of water. 4. Degree French (°Fr): The number of parts of calcium carbonate equivalent hardness presents in 105 parts of water. 1° Fr = 1 part of CaCO3 hardness eq per 105 parts of water. 5. Milli-equivalent per liter (meq/L):- is the number of milli-equivalents of hardness present per liter. 1meq/L= 1meq of CaCO3 per liter of water = 10-3x 50 g of CaCO3 eq. per liter = 50 mg of CaCO3 eq. per liter = 50 mg/L of CaCO3 eq. = 50ppm. Relationship between various units of hardness: 1 ppm 1 mg/L 1 ° Cl 1 ° Fr = 1 mg/L = 1 ppm = 1.433° Fr = 10 ppm = 0.1° Fr= 0.07° Cl = 0.02 meq/ L = 0.07° Cl = 0.1° Fr = 14.3 ppm = 14.3 mg/L = 0.7° Cl = 10 mg/L calculation of equivalents of CaCO3: Salt/ion Molar mass Chemical Equivalent or Equivalent Weight Multiplication converting for equivalents of CaCO3 factor into Ca(HCO3)2 Mg(HCO3)2 CaSO4 CaCl2 MgSO4 MgCl2 CaCO3 MgCO3 CO2 Ca(NO3)2 Mg(NO3)2 - HCO3 OH- CO2 NaAlO2 Al2(SO4)3 FeSO4.7H2O H+ HCl 162 146 136 111 120 95 100 84 44 164 148 61 17 60 82 342 278 1 36.5 81 73 68 55.5 60 47.5 50 42 22 82 74 61 17 30 82 57 139 1 1 100/162 100/146 100/136 100/111 100/120 100/95 100/100 100/84 100/44 100/164 100/148 100/122 100/34 100/60 100/164 100/114 100/278 100/2 100/73 Problem-1: A sample of water is found to contains following dissolving salts in milligrams per litre Mg(HCO3)2 = 73, CaCl2 = 111, Ca(HCO3)2 = 81, MgSO4 = 40 and MgCl2 = 95. Calculate temporary and permanent hardness and total hardness. Solution: Amount of the hardness Name of the hardness causing salts(mg/Lit) causing salts 73 Mg(HCO3)2 111 CaCl2 81 Ca(HCO3)2 40 MgSO4 MgCl2 95 Temporary hardness = Mg(HCO3)2 + Ca(HCO3)2 Amounts equivalent to Molecular weight of hardness causing salts 146 111 162 120 95 CaCO3 (mg/Lit) 73x100/146 = 50 111x100/111 = 100 81x100/162 = 50 40x100/120 = 33.3 = 100 95x100/95 = 50 + 50 = 100mgs/Lit. Permanent hardness = CaCl2+ MgSO4 + MgCl2 = 100 + 33.3 + 100 = 233.3mgs/Lit. Total hardness = Temporary hardness + Permanent hardness = 100 + 233.3 = 333.3mgs/Lit. POTABLE WATER AND ITS SPECIFICATIONS Water free from contaminants or water that is safe for human consumption is called potable water. The following are the specifications of water drinking purpose. 1. The water should be clear (colorless), odorless and pleasant taste. 2. The optimum hardness of water must be 125ppm. 3. The pH of potable water should be 7.0 to 8.5. 4. The recommended maximum concentration of total dissolved solids (TDS) in potable water must not exceed 500 ppm. 5. The turbidity in drinking water should not exceed 25 ppm. 6. The water must be free from heavy metals like Lead, Arsenic, Chromium and Manganese. 7. The water must be free from pathogenic bacteria 8. The water must be free from dissolved gases like H2S, CO2 and NH3. BOILER TROUBLES A boiler is a closed vessel in which water under pressure is transformed into steam by the application of heat. The steam so generated is used in i ndustries and generation of power. In modern pressure boilers and laboratories, the water required is used pure than the distilled water. A boiler feed water should correspond with the following composition: > > > > Its hardness should be below 0.2ppm. Its caustic alkalinity (due to OH-) should lie between 0.15ppm to 0.45ppm. Its soda alkalinity (due to Na2CO3) should lie in between 0.45ppm to 1ppm. It’s should be free from dissolved gases like O2, CO2, in order to prevent boiler corrosion. Excess of impurities in the boiler feed water generally cause the following problems: 1. Sludge’s and Scale formation 2. Caustic embrittlement Boilers are employed for the steam generation in power plants, where water as continuously heated to produce steam. As more and more water is removed from water in the form of steam, the boiler water gets concentrated with dissolved salts progressively reaches the saturation point. At this point the dissolved salts are precipitated out and slowly settle on the inner walls of the boiler plate. The precipitation takes place in two ways. SLUDGES Sludge is a soft, loosy and slimy precipitate formed within the boiler. It is formed at comparatively colder portions of the boiler and collects in the area where flow rate is slow. Ex: MgCO3, MgCl2, CaCl2, MgSO4. Reasons for formation of sludges: The dissolved salts whose solubility is more in hot water and less in cold water produce sludges. Disadvantages of sludges: 1. Sludges are bad conductors of heat and results in the wastage of heat and fuel. 2. Excessive sludge formation leads to the settling of sludge in slow circulation areas such as pipe connections, plug openings, gauge-glass connections leading to the choking of the pipes. Prevention of sludge formation: a. By using soft water which is free from dissolved salts like MgCO3, MgCl2, CaCl2 and MgSO4 can prevent sludge formation. b. By blow down operation carried out frequently can prevent sludge formation. SCALES Scales are hard, adhering precipitates formed on the inner walls of the boilers. Scales are stick very firmly on to the inner walls of the boiler. It is removed with chisel and hammer. Scales are formed by decomposition of calcium bicarbonate in low pressure boilers. It is most due to the presence of CaSO4, MgCl 2, Silica, Ca(HCO)2. Reasons for formation of scales: a. Decomposition of calcium bicarbonate: The calcium bicarbonate at high temperature decomposes to calcium carbonate which is insoluble salt, forms scale in low pressure boilers. Ca(HCO3)2 →CaCO3 + H2O + CO2 b. Hydrolysis of Magnesium salts: Magnesium salts gets hydrolyzed at high temperature forming Mg(OH)2 precipitation which forms salt type scale. MgCl2 + H2O → Mg(OH)2 + 2HCl c. Decomposition of calcium sulphate: The solubility of CaSO4 in water decreases with the increase in temperature and forms precipitation on the surface of the boiler further which forms hard scale. This type of scales is formed in high-pressure boilers. d. Presence of silica: SiO2 present even in small quantities, deposits as Calcium silicates (CaSiO3) or Magnesium silicates (MgSiO3). The deposits form hard scale and are very difficult to remove. Disadvantages of Scales: Wastage of heat and fuels: Scales poor thermal conductivity so that rate of heat transformation is Thickness (mm)) 0.325 0.625 1.25 2.5 Wastage of fuel 10% 15% 50% 80% 150% 12 1. Lowering of boiler safety is due to overheating of the boiler material becomes softer and weaker, which causes distortion of boiler. 2. Decrease in efficiency of the boiler due to scales deposited in the values and cond ensers of the boiler cause choking. 3. Danger of explosion which happens the formation of the scales, the boiler plate faces higher temperature outside and lesser temperature inside due to uneven expansion. The water comes suddenly contact with overheated portion and larger amount steam is formed immediately, this results in development of sudden high pressure which may cause explosion of the boiler. Prevention of scales: a. b. By giving thermal shocks, by sudden heating and sudden cooling which makes scale brittle If the scale formation is soft it can be removed by a scrapper, wire brush. c. and removed by scrubbing with wire brush. If scale is very hard that is formed by CaCO3 can be removed by washing with 5-10% HCl and CaSO4 can be removed with EDTA solution. Distinguish between sludge and scale. Sludge Scale They are soft, loose and slimy precipitate. They form hard deposits. They form non-adherent deposits and can be easily removed. They stick firmly to the inner surface of the boiler and are very difficult to remove. They are formed by substances like CaCl2, MgCl2, MgSO4, MgCO3, etc. They are formed at comparatively colder portions of the boiler. They decrease efficiency of boiler but are less dangerous. They are formed by substances like CaSO4, Mg(OH)2, etc. They are formed at heated portions of the boiler. They decrease efficiency of boiler and chances of explosion are also there. They can be removed by blow down operation. They can’t be removed by blow down operation. CAUSTIC EMBRITTLEMENT The formation of brittle and in crystalline cracks in the boiler shell is called caustic embrittlement. The main reason for this is the presence of alkali -metal carbonates and bicarbonates in feed water. In lime-soda process, it is likely that, some residual Na2CO3 is still present in the softened water. This Na2CO3 decomposes to give NaOH and CO2, due to which the boiler water becomes “Caustic Soda”. Na2CO3+ H2O → 2NaOH + CO2 The H2O evaporates, the concentration of NaOH increase progressively creating a concentration cell as given below thus dissolving the iron of the boiler as sodium ferrate (Na2FeO2). (-)Anode: ‘Fe’ at bents Conc.NaOH Dil.NaOH ‘Fe’ at plane Surface: Cathode (+) This causes embrittlement of boiler parts such as bends, joints, reverts etc, due to which the boiler gets fail. The iron at plane surfaces surrounded by dilute NaOH becomes cathodic while the iron at bends and joints surrounded by highly concentrated NaOH becomes anodic which consequently decayed or corroded. Caustic embrittlement can be prevented: a. By maintaining the pH value of water and neutralization of alkali. b. By using Sodium Phosphate as softening reagents, in the external treatment of boilers. c. Caustic embrittlement can also be prevented by adding Tannin or Lignin or Sodium sulphate which prevents the infiltration of caustic-soda solution blocking the hair-cracks. d. By adding Na2SO4 to boiler water. Na2SO4 is added to boiler water so that the ratio Na2SO4Concentration and NaOH concentration is kept as 1:1:,2:1,3:1 in boilers working respectively at pressure up to 10,20 and 30 atmosphere. NaOH Concentration is kept as 1:1:2:1 and 3:1 in boilers working respectively at pressures up to 10, 20 and 30 atmospheres. Disadvantages of caustic embrittlement: The cracking or weakening of the boiler metal causes failure of the boiler. INTERNAL TREATMENT OF WATER Suitable chemicals are added to the boiler water either to precipitate or to convert the scale into compounds is called internal treatment of the boiler feed water. Internal treatment can be done following types. 1. Calgon conditioning: Involves in adding calgon to boiler water. It prevents the scale and sludge formation by forming soluble complex compound with CaSO4. Calgon = Sodium hexa meta phosphate = Na2 [Na4 (PO3)6] Na2 [Na4 (PO3)6] →2Na+ + [Na4P6O18]-2 2CaSO4 + [Na4P6O18] -2 → [Ca2 P6O18]-2 + 2Na2SO4 2. Phosphate conditioning: The addition of sodium phosphate in hard water reacts with the hardness causing agents and gives calcium and magnesium phosphates which are soft and non-adhere and can be removed easily by blow-down operation. 3CaCl2 + 2 Na3PO4 → Ca3(PO4)2 + 6NaCl 3MgSO4 + 2 Na3PO4 → Mg3(PO4)2 + 3Na2SO4 Generally three types of Phosphates are employed. i. Tri sodium Phosphate (Na3PO4): is too alkaline used for treat to too acidic water. ii. Di sodium Phosphate (Na2 HPO4): is weakly alkaline used for treat to weakly acidic water. iii. Sodium dihydrogen Phosphate (Na H2PO4): is too acidic used for treat to too alkaline water. 3. Colloidal conditioning: The addition of organic substances such as Kerosene, tannin, Gel. These substances gets coated over the scale forming precipitates and gives a loose and non - sticky precipitates which can be removed by using blow-down operation. Priming: When a boiler is steaming (i.e., producing steam) rapidly, some particles of the liquid water are carried along with the steam. This process of ‘wet steam’ formation is known as ‘Priming’. Causes: Priming is caused by: 1. The presence of large amount of dissolved salts 2. High steam velocities 3. Sudden boiling 4. Improper boiler design 5. Sudden increase in steam production rate. Prevention: 1. By fitting mechanical purifiers 2. Avoiding rapid change in steam rate 3. Maintaining low water levels in boilers 4. Effective softening and filtration of boiler feed water 5. Blow down of the boiler. Foaming: The phenomenon of formation of persistent foam or bubbles on the surface of water inside the boiler, which do not break easily. Causes: 1. Pure water has very little foaming whereas the water containing dissolved impurities and suspended matter has a greater tendency to produce foam. 2. The presence of large quantity of suspended impurities and oils lowers the surface tension producing foam. Prevention: 1. Adding antifoaming chemicals like castor oil. 2. Besides castor oil, Gallic acid and tannic acids, corn oil, cotton seed oil, sperm oil, bees wax, etc., are also used as antifoaming agents. 3. Blow down operation of the boiler can prevent foaming. 4. Removing oil form boiler water by adding compounds like sodium aluminate. Disadvantages of Priming and Foaming: Priming and Foaming usually occur together. They are objectionable because: - 1. The dissolved salts in boiler water are carried by the wet steam to super heater and turbine blades where they get deposited and reduce the efficiency. 2. The dissolved salts enter the parts of other machinery where steam is used thereby decreasing the life of machinery. 3. The actual height of the water column cannot be judged thereby making the maintenance of boiler pressure becomes difficult. Boiler corrosion: • The decay of boiler material by chemical or electrochemical attack by its environment is known as “Boiler corrosion”. • The main reasons for boiler corrosion are:- Dissolved Oxygen: water contains usually about 8ml of dissolved oxygen per liter at room temperature. Disadvantages of dissolved oxygen: In presence of prevailing high temperature, the dissolved Oxygen attacks boiler material as follows: 2Fe+ 2H2O+ O2 → 2Fe(OH)2 4Fe(OH)2+ O2 →2[Fe2O3.2H2O] (rust) Removal of dissolved Oxygen: By adding calculated quantity of Sodium sulphite (Na2SO3) or hydrazine(N2H4) or sodium 1) sulphide (Na2S). 2Na2SO3+ O2 --------------► 2 Na2SO4 N2H4+ O2 Na2S + 2O2 ------------ ------------► Na2SO4 N2+ 2H2O Hydrazine is an ideal internal treatment chemical for the removal of dissolved oxygen. Azamina 8001-RD (a polyvalent organic compound) has been employed for degassing water in minimum time. 2) By Mechanical de-aeration i.e., spraying water through a perforated plate fitted in degasification tower, heated from sides and connected to a vacuum pump as shown in the figure. High temperature, low pressure and large exposed surface (provided by perforated plates) reduce the dissolved oxygen in water. Dissolved Carbon dioxide: has a slow corrosive effect on the materials of boiler 3) plate. Under the high temperature and pressure the bicarbonates decompose to produce CO2. Mg(HCO3)2-------► MgCO3 + H2O + CO2 Disadvantages of CO2: It has slow corrosive effect on boiler plates by producing the carbonic acid. CO2 + H2O----------- ► H2CO3 Removal of CO2: By adding calculated amount of ammonia. 2NH4OH + CO2 → (NH4)2CO3 + H2O By mechanical deaeration process along with oxygen. Acids from dissolved salts: water containing dissolved Mg salts liberate acids on hydrolysis. Ex: MgCl2 + 2H2O → Mg(OH)2 + 2HCl Disadvantages of acids: The acids react with the iron of boiler plate in a chain reaction producing HCl again and again. Fe+2HCl → FeCl2 + H2 FeCl2+2H2O →Fe(OH)2 +2HCl Presence of even a small amount of MgCl 2 will have corrosion of iron to a large extent. Prevention of acid corrosion: 1) By softening of boiler water to remove MgCl2 from the water. 2) By frequent blow down operation. 3) Addition of inhibitors to form a thin film on the surface of the boiler protecting the metal from attack. Sodium silicates, sodium phosphates and sodium chromate acts as good corrosion inhibitors. External Removal Process 1) Ion exchange process is also known as demineralization process. Ion- Exchange resins are insoluble. Cross linked long chain organic polymers with a micro porous structure, and the “functional Groups” attached to the chains are responsible for the ion-exchanging properties. Resins with acidic functional group are capable of exchanging H+ ions with other cations. Resins with basic functional groups are capable of exchanging OH-ions with other anions. Resins are classified as: i. Cation Exchange Resins ii. Anion Exchange Resins. i. Cation Exchange Resins: Cation exchange resins are styrene divinyl benzene co -polymers, which on sulphonation (or) carboxylation, which contains -COOH, -SO3H functional groups which responsible for exchanging their hydrogen ions with cations in water. 2RH + Ca(HCO)2 → R2Ca + H2CO3 , 2RH + Mg(HCO)2 →R2Mg + H2CO3 , 2RH + CaCl2 → R2Ca + 2HCl ii. Anion Exchange Resins: Anion exchange resins are Phenol formaldehyde (or) amine formaldehyde copolymers, which contains amino or basic functional groups which responsible for exchanging their OH- ions with anions in water. ROH + HCl → RCl + H2O 2ROH + H2SO4 → R2SO4 + 2H2O ROH + H2CO3 →RHCO3 + H2O(ROH = anion exchange resin) In ion-exchange process, hard water is allowed to pass through cation exchange resins, which remove Ca+2 and Mg+2 ions and exchange equivalent amount of H+ ions. Anions exchange resins remove bicarbonates, chlorides and sulphates from water exchange equivalent amount of OH- ions. Thus by passing hard water through cation hardness is observed by the following reactions. H+ and OH-ions, thus released in water from respective cation and anion exchange columns, get combined to produce water molecules. H+ + OH- →H2O The water coming out from the exchanger is ion free from anions and cations. Thus water of zero hardness is obtained. Regeneration: When cation exchanger losses capacity of producing H+ ions and exchanger losses capacity of producing OH- ions, they are said to be exhausted. The exhausted cation exchanger is regenerated by passing it through dilute sulphuric acid. , R2Ca + 2HCl → 2RH + CaCl2 R2Mg + 2H2SO4 →2RH + MgSO4 The exhausted anion exchanger is regenerated by passing a dilute solution of N aOH. RCl + NaOH → ROH +NaCl RHCO3 + NaOH → ROH + NaHCO3 Merits of Ion-exchange process: > The process can be used to soften highly acidic or alkaline water. > > So it is very good for treating water for use in high-pressure boilers. It produces water of very low hardness (2ppm) Demerits of Ion-exchange process: > The equipment is costly and more expensive chemicals are needed. > If water contains turbidity, the output of the process is reduced. The turbidity must be below 10ppm; else it has to be removed by coagulation and filtration. 2) Lime-Soda process: In this process, lime [(Ca(OH)2)] and soda [Na2CO3] are the reagents used to precipitate the dissolved salts of Ca +2 and Mg+2 as CaCO3 and Mg(OH)2 which are later on filtered off. Lime reacts with temporary hardness causing salts, Mg permanent hardness, CO2, acids, bicarbonates and alums. Lime cannot remove permanent hardness which should be removed by soda. Precautions to be followed during process: Only calculated amounts of lime and soda must be added. Excess of lime-soda causes boiler troubles like corrosion and caustic embrittlement. The chemical reactions of lime and soda are slow and the precipitates CaCO 3 and Mg(OH)2 are very fine. Proper time must be given for the reactions of softening process to complete, because all the reactions of the process are slow. Cold lime soda process: Calculated amounts of lime and soda are mixed with water at room temperature. Cold lime soda process provides water containing residual hardness of 50-60 ppm. The precipitates formed are finely divided which do not settle down and can"t be filtered easily. So, it is essential to add small amounts of coagulants (like alum, aluminium sulphate, sodium aluminate) which hydrolyse to flocculent, gelatinous precipitate of Al(OH) 3 and entraps the precipitate. Use of sodium aluminate as Coagulant also helps in the removal of silica as well as oil present in the water. NaAlO2+ 2H2O → NaOH + Al(OH)3 Al2(SO4)3 + 3Ca(HCO3)2 →2Al(OH)3 |+ 3CaSO4+ 6CO2 Method: Raw water and calculated quantities of chemicals (lime+soda+coagulant) are fed from the top into inner vertical circular chamber fitted with a vertical rotating shaft carrying a number of paddles. As the raw water and chemicals flow down, there is vigorous stirring and continuous mixing whereby softening of water takes place. The heavy sludge settles down in the outer chamber by the time softened water reaches up. The softened water then passes through a filtering media (made of wood fibres) to ensure complete removal of sludge. Filtered soft water finally flows out continuously through the outlet at the top and sludge settling at the bottom of the outer chamber is drawn off occasionally. Hot Soda Lime Process: It involves treating water with softening chemicals at a temperature of 800-1500 C. Since hot process is operated at a temperature close to the boiling point of the solution, so Raw wate feed intet Super heated steam inlet Reaction tank Conical sedimentation tank Precipitate d sludges [CaCO and Mg (OH) ] Precipitate d sludge outlet a) The reaction proceeds faster, b) Softening capacity of hot process is increased, c) The precipitate and sludge formed Softened water settle down rapidly and hence no coagulants are needed, Coarse sandlayB d) Much of the dissolved gases (CO2) Gravels layer are driven out, Fitered softened water outlet e) Viscosity of softened water is lower so filtration of water becomes much easier. Hot lime soda process produces water of residual hardness of 15-30ppm. Process: It contains essentially three parts 1) A reaction tank in which water, chemical and steam are thoroughly mixed. 2) A conical sedimentation vessel in which sludge settle down. A sand filter which ensures complete removal of sludge from the softened water. Advantages of Lime-Soda process: 1) It is very economical. 2) The process increases the pH value of treated water thereby corrosion of distribution pipes is reduced. 3) Besides removal of hardness causing salts, minerals, iron and manganese present in water is removed. 4) Due to alkaline nature, amount of pathogenic bacteria in water is considerably reduced. Disadvantages Of Lime-Soda Process: 1) Skilled supervision is required for efficient and economical softening. 2) Disposal of large amounts of sludge poses a problem. 3) This can remove hardness only up to 15ppm, which is not good f or boilers. Differences between cold and hot lime soda process: - Sl.No. Cold Lime Soda Process Hot Lime Soda Process 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. It is done at room temperature. It is done at elevated temperatures (84- 100 0C). It is slow process. It is rapid process. Use of coagulants is must. Coagulants are not needed. Filtration is not easy. Filtration is easy as viscosity of water becomes low at elevated temperatures. Softened water has residual hardness Softened water has residual hardness around 60 ppm. Dissolved gases are not removed. It has low softening capacity. around 15-30 ppm. Dissolved gases such as CO2 are removed to some extent. It has high softening capacity. Points to be followed while solving problems in lime soda problems: 1) To convert the hardness of the hardness causing salts in terms of CaCO3 equivalents. If CaCO3 is given as hardness causing salt, it should also be considered as temporary 2) hardness expressed in terms of CaCO3. 3) MgCO3, Mg(HCO3)2, should be converted to CaCO3 equivalents. 4) Some salts like NaCl, KCl, Silica, K2SO4, Fe2O3 neither cause hardness nor react with lime and soda. Hence they must not be considered for calculation of lime and soda required. 5) The hardness of Al2(SO4)3 must be multiplied by 3 for both lime and soda, HCl hardness must be multiplied by 0.5, Mg(HCO3)2 hardness must be multiplied by 2, NaHCO3, KHCO3, NaAlO2 hardness multiplied by 0.5 and should be subtracted for calculation of amount of lime and soda required respectively. 3) Zeolite Process Zeolite are hydrated sodium alumino siticates Na2O.Al2O3 xSiO2.yH2O. (x=2-10 and y=2- 6) (inorganic salts). They work as water softners by replacing the calcium and magnesium ions in water with the sodium ions in zeolite. Zeolite Natural zeolites Synthetic zeolites 1. Natural zeolites Non-porous, amoamorphous and durable e.g. Na2O. Al2O3.3SiO2.2H2O (Natrolite) CaO.Al2O3.4SiO2.4H2O (Laumonite) 2. Synthetic zeolites Gel like structures, generally porous Na2CO3, Al2O3 and SiO2 heated together Na2O.Al2O3 xSiO2.yH2O. (x=2-10 and y=2-6) For softening of water by zeolite process, hard water is percolated at a specified rate through a bed of zeolite. Zeolite holds sodium ion loosely and can be represented as Na 2Z, where Z represents insoluble radical frame work. When the water passes through the zeolite the hardness causing ions (Ca+2, Mg+2 etc.) are retained by the zeolite as CaZ and MgZ respectively, while the outgoing water contains equivalent amount of sodium salts. The block diagram and chemical reactions taking place in zeolite softener are: Ca(HCO3)2 + Na2Z → CaZ + 2NaHCO3 Mg(HCO3)2 + Na2Z → MgZ + 2NaHCO3 CaSO4 + Na 2Z → CaZ + Na 2SO4 CaCl 2 + Na 2Z → CaZ + 2NaCl MgSO4 + Na 2Z → MgZ + Na 2SO4 MgCl 2 + Na2Z → MgZ + 2NaCl Regeneration of Zeolite Bed After some time, when the zeolite is completely changed into calcium and magnesium zeolites, then it gets exhausted (saturated with Ca+2Ca+2 and Mg+2Mg+2 ions) and it ceases to soften water. It can be regenerated and reused by treating it with a 10% brine (sodium chloride) solution. Regeneration reactions are CaZ+2NaCl→Na2Z+CaClMgZ+2NaCl→Na2Z+MgCl2 Advantages: 1. Almost complete removal of hardness (10ppm) 2. It is compact 3. Requires only less time for softening 4. No sludge formation since no precipitate is formed 5. Can work under pressure also - and CO3 Disadvantages 1. More sodium salt concentration in softened water. 2. Turbidity containing water cannot be used 3. Process exchange only Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions but cannot exchange HCO3 2- ions. So cannot be used in boilers 4. If Fe 2+ and Mn2+ are present in large quantities. They form respective zeolites so zeolites cannot be regerated 5. Water consisting of high alkalinity or acidity cannot be used because zeolite is decomposed. Questions 1. How temporary hardness differs from permanent hardness? 2. Define hardness and estimate hardness of water by using EDTA solution? 3. Explain Caustic embrittlement, Scale & Sludge. 4. Explain determination of fluoride ions (F-) by ion selective electrode method. 5. Explain softening of water using Ion exchange process. 6. What is desalination? Explain reverse osmosis process. 7. Explain Steps involved in treatment of sewage water. 8. What is Potable water and what are its specifications. 9. Explain Steps involved in the treatment of potable water. 10. 0.28 grams of CaCO3 were dissolved in HCl and the solution was made upto one litre with distilled water. 100 ml of the above solution required 28 ml of EDTA solution on titration. 100 ml of hard water sample consumed 33 ml of same EDTA solution EBT indicator. 100 ml of this water after boiling cooling and filtering required 10 ml of EDTA solution in titration. Calculate the permanent and temporary hardness of water sample in ppm. 11. Explain the following? a. Calgon conditioning and Phosphate conditioning of boiler feed water. b. What is defluoridation and explain Nalgonda technique. 12. What is Hardness and calculate a sample of water is found to contains following analytical data in milligrams per litre Mg(HCO3)2 = 14.6, MgCh = 9.5, MgSO4 = 6.0 and Ca(HCO3)2 = 16.2. Calculate temporary and permanent hardness of water in parts per mil lion, Degree Clarke’s and Degree French. Module – 2: LUBRICATION AND LUBRICANTS A substance which is capable of reducing friction between two surfaces which are sliding over each other is called Lubricant. Due to Lubricant the co-efficient of friction between two rubbing surfaces is reduced. The loss of energy due to friction is considerably reduced in this manner. Petroleum is the main source of Lubricants, but synthetic Lubricants have also been prepared for specific purpose. The lubricant acts in a number of manners. It acts as a coolant by removing the heat of friction generated as a result of rubbing of surfaces. In lubrication it does not allow a direct contact between the rubbing surfaces. A thin film of lubricant lies between these rubbing surfaces under proper condition of lubrication. In internal combustion engines, it acts as a seal by sealing the piston & cylinder wall at compression rings. Hence there is no leakage of gases at high pressure in the combustion chamber. Lubrication also avoids power loss in the IC engine. The main features of lubrication are: 1. It reduces wear and tear and surface deformation, by avoiding direct contact between the rubbing surfaces. 2. It reduces the loss of energy in the form of heat by acting as a coolant. 3. It reduces the efficiency of the machine by reducing the waste of energy. 4. It reduces expansion of metal by local frictional heat. 5. It minimizes the liberation of frictional heat and hence avoids seizure of moving surfaces. 6. It prevents unsmooth motion relative motion of the moving or sliding parts. 7. It reduces the maintenances as well as running cost of the machine to a large extent. 8. As seen above it also acts as a seal in IC engines. CLASSIFICATION OF LUBRICANTS Lubricants can be broadly classified, on the basis of their physical state, as follows: (1) Liquid lubricants or lubricating oils; (2) Semi-solid lubricants or greases, and (3) Solid lubricants. 1. Lubricating oils Lubricating oils reduce friction and wear between two moving/sliding metallic surfaces by providing a continuous fluid film in-between them. They also act as: (a) cooling medium; (b) sealing agent, and (c) corrosion preventer. Good lubricating oil must possess: (a) low pressure (or high boiling point), (b) adequate viscosity for particular service conditions, (c) low freezing point, (d) high oxidation resistance. (e) Heat stability, (f) non-corrosive properties, (g) stability to decomposition at the operating temperatures. Lubricating oils are further classified as: (1) Animal and vegetable oils: Before the advent of the petroleum industry, oils of the vegetable and animal origins were the most commonly used lubricants. They possess good oiliness (a property by virtue of which the oil sticks to the surface of machine parts, even under high temperatures and heavy loads). However, they: (i) are costly, (ii) undergo oxidation easily forming gummy and acidic products and get thickened on coming in contact with air, (iii) have some tendency to hydrolyze, when allowed to remain in contact with moist- air or aqueous medium. So at present, they are rarely used as such. Actually, they are used as "blending agent" with other ' lubricating oils (like mineral oils) to produce desired effects in the latter. (2) Mineral or petroleum oils are obtained by distillation of petroleum. The length of the hydrocarbon chain in petroleum oils varies between about 12to 50 carbon atoms. The shorter-chain oils have lower viscosity than the longer-chain hydrocarbons. These are the most widely used lubricants, because they are; (i) cheap, (ii) available in abundance, and (iii) quite stable under service conditions. However, they possess poor oiliness as compared to that of animal and vegetable oils. Tile oiliness of petroleum oils can be increased by the addition of high molecular weight compounds like oleic acid, stearic acid, etc. Purification: Crude liquid petroleum oils contain lot of impurities (like wax, asphalt,etc.) and consequently, they have to be thoroughly purified before being put to use.(i) The wax, if not removed, raises the pour-point and renders the lubricating oil unfit for use at low temperatures. (ii) Certain constituents get easily oxidized under working conditions and cause sludge formation. (iii) Some constituents mainly asphalt, undergo decomposition at higher temperatures, causing carbon deposition and sludge formation. A number of processes are used for removing these unwanted impurities by using Dewaxing or acid refining or by solvent refining. (3) Blended oils: No single oil saves as the most satisfactory lubricant for many of the modern machineries. Typical properties of petroleum oils are improved by incorporating specific additives. These so-called 'blended oils' give desired lubricating properties, required for particular machinery. The following additives are employed (i) Oiliness-carriers: Oiliness of a lubricant can be increased by addition of an oiliness-carrier like vegetable oils (e.g., coconut oil, castor oil) and fatty acids (like palmitic acid, stearic acid, oleic acid. etc.). (ii) Extreme-pressure additives: Under extreme-pressure, a thick film of oil is difficult to maintain, and the oil need to have a high oiliness. Besides improving oiliness directly, high- pressure additives are used. these additives contain certain materials which are absorbe d on the metal surface or react chemically with metal, producing a surface a layer of low shear- strength on the metal surface, thereby preventing the tearing up of the metal. Another property of high-pressure additives is that they react, at high temperature on metal surfaces, forming surface alloys so as to prevent the welding together of the rubbing parts under severe operating conditions. The main substances added for high-pressure lubrication are :(a) fatty ester, acids, etc., which form oxide film with the metal surface; (i) organic materials, which contain Sulphur; (c) organic chlorine compounds; (d) organic phosphorus compounds. High-pressure lubricants also contain some lead in order to produce thin film of lead sulphide and other lead compounds on the surfaces of machines like gear teeth. (iii) Pour-point depressing additives used are phenol and certain condensation products of chlorinated wax with naphthalene. These prevent the separation of wax from the oil. (iv) Viscosity-index improvers are certain high molecular weight compounds like hexanol. (v) Thickeners such as polystyrene are materials usually of molecular weight between 300 and 3,000. They are added in order to give the lubricating oil a higher viscosity. (vi) Antioxidants or inhibitors, when added to oil, retard oxidation of oil by getting them- selves preferentially oxidized. They are particularly added in lubricants used in internal combustion engines, turbines, etc., where oxidation of oil is a serious problem. The antioxidants are aromatic, phenolic or amino compounds. (vii) Corrosion preventers are organic compounds of phosphorus or antimony. They protect the metal from corrosion by preventing contact between the metal surfaces and the corrosive substances. (viii) Abrasion inhibitors like tricresyl phosphate. (ix) Antifoaming agents (like glycols and glycerol) help in decreasing foam formation. (x) Emulsifiers such as sodium salts of sulphonic acid. (xi) Deposit inhibitors are detergents such as the salts of phenol and carboxylic acids . Deposits are formed in internal combustion engine, due to imperfect combustion. Such additive disperses and cleans the deposits. 2. GREASES OR SEMI-SOLID LUBRICANTS Lubricating grease is a semi - solid, consisting of a soap dispersed throughout liquid lubricating oil. The liquid lubricant may be petroleum oil or even synthetic oil and it may contain any of the additives for specific requirements. Greases are prepared by saponification of fat (such as tallow or fatty acid) with alkali (like lime, caustic soda, etc.), followed by adding hot lubricating oil while under agitation. The total amount of mineral oil added determines the consistency of the finished grease. The structure of lubricating greases is that of a gel. Soaps are gelling agents, which give an interconnected structure (held together by intermolecular forces) containing the added oil. At high temperatures, the soap dissolves in the oil, whereupon the interconnected structures cease to exist and the grease liquefies. Consistency of greases may vary from a heavy viscous liquid to the of a stiff solid mass. To improve the heat-resistance of grease, inorganic solid thickening agents (like finely divided clay, bentonite, colloidal silica, carbon black, etc.) are added. Greases have higher shear or frictional resistance than oils and, therefore, can support much heavier loads at lower speeds. They also do not require as much attention unlike the lubricating liquids. But greases have a tendency to separate into oils and soaps. Grease are used : (i) in situations where oil cannot remain in place, due to high load, low speed, intermittent operation, sudden jerks, etc. e.g. rail axle boxes, (ii) in bearing and gears that work at high temperatures ; (iii) in situations where bearing needs to be sealed against entry of dust, dirt, grit or moisture, because greases are less liable to contamination by these ; (iv) in situations where dripping or spurting of oil is undesirable, because unlike oils, greases if used do not splash or drip over articles being prepared by the machine. For example, in machines preparing paper, textiles, edible articles, etc. The main function of soap is thickening agent so that grease sticks firmly to the metal surfaces. However, the nature of the soap decides: (a) the temperature up to which the grease can be used; (b) its consistency; (c) Its water and oxidation resistance. So, greases are classified after the soap used in their manufacture. Important greases are: (i) Calcium-based greases or cup-greases are emulsions of petroleum oils with calcium soaps. They are, generally, prepared by adding requisite amount of calcium hydroxide to hot oil (like tallow) while under agitation. These greases are the cheapest and most commonly used. They are insoluble in water, so water resistant. However, they are satisfactory for use at low temperatures, because above 80oC, oil and soap begins to separate out. (ii) Soda-base greases are petroleum oils, thickened by mixing sodium soaps. They are not water resistant, because the sodium soap content is soluble in water. However, they can be used up to 175oC. They are suitable for use in ball bearings, where the lubricant gets heated due to friction. (iii) Lithium-based greases are petroleum oils, thickened by mixing lithium soaps. They are water-resistant and suitable for use at low temperatures [up to 15oC] only. (iv) Axle greases are very cheap resin greases, prepared by adding lime (or any heavy metal hydroxide) to resin and fatty oils. The mixture is thoroughly mixed and allowed to stand, when grease floats as stiff mass. Filters (like talc and mica) are also added to them. They are water- resistant and suitable for less delicate equipments working under high loads and at low speeds. Besides the above, there are greases prepared by dispersing solids (like graphite, soapstone) in mineral oil. These are mostly used in rail axle boxes, machine bearings, tractors rollers, wires ropes etc. 3. SOLID LUBRICANTS Solid lubricants are used where: (i) operating conditions are such that a lubricating film cannot be secured by use of lubricating oils or greases; (ii) contamination (by the entry of dust or grit particles) of lubricating oil or grease is unacceptable, (iii) the operating temperatures or load is too high even for a semi-solid lubricant to remain in position; and (iv) combustible lubricants must be avoided. The two most usual solid lubricants employed are graphite and molybdenum disulphide. Graphite consists of a multitude of flat plates, one atom thick, which are held together by only weak bonds, so that the force to shear the crystals parallel to the layers is low. Consequently, the parallel layers slide over one another easily. Usually, some organic substances are mixed solid lubricants so that they may stick firmly to the metal surface. On the other hand, molybdenum disulphide has a sandwich like structure in which a layer of a Mo atoms lies between two layers of S atoms. Poor interlaminar attraction is responsible for low shear strength in a direction parallel to the layers. Solids lubricants are used either in the dry powder or mixed with water or oil. The solids fill up the low spots in the surfaces of moving parts and form solid films, which have low frictional resistance. The usual coefficient of friction between solid lubricants is between 0.005 and 0.01. (a) Graphite is the most widely used of all solid lubricants. It is very soapy to touch, non - inflammable and not oxidized in air below 375oC. In the absence of air, it can be used upto very much higher temperatures. Graphite is used either in powdered form or as suspension. Suspension of graphite in oil or water is brought about with the help of an emulsifying agent like tannin. When graphite is dispersed in oil, it is called 'oildag' and when it is dispersed in water; it is called 'aquadag'. Oildag is found particularly useful in internal combustion engines, because it forms a film between the piston rings and the cylinder and gives a tight-fit contact, thereby increasing compression. On the other hand, oildag is useful where a lubricant free from oil is needed. e.g., foodstuffs industry. Graphite is also mixed with greases to form graphite-greases, which are used at still higher temperatures. Uses: As lubricant in air-compressors, lathes, general machine-shop works, foodstuffs industry, railway track-joints, open gears, chains, cast iron bearings, internal combustion engine, etc. (b) Molybdenum disulphide possesses very low coefficient of friction and is stable in air up to 400oC. Its fine powder may be sprinkled on surfaces sliding at high velocities, when it fills low spots in metal surfaces, forming its film. It is also used along with solvents and in greases. Besides the more important graphite and molybdenum disulphide, other substances like soapstone, talc, mica, etc., are also used as solid lubricants. 4. SYNTHETIC LUBRICANTS Modern synthetic lubricants possess, in general, the following distinguishing characteristics: (1) non-inflammable, (ii) high flash points, (iii) high thermal stability at high operating temperatures, (iv) high viscosity-index, (v) chemical stability, etc. Important synthetic lubricants are given below. (1) Polymerized hydrocarbons like polyethylene, polypropylene, polybutylene in the molecular weight range of 500 to 50,000 are residue-free, light in color, free from non- hydrocarbon impurities, chemically non-reactive and high temperature lubricants. (2) Polyglycols and related compounds like polyethylene glycol, polypropylene glycol, polyglycidyl ethers, and higher polyalkylene oxides can be used as water-soluble as well as water-insoluble lubricants in rubber bearings and joints. Polyglycidyl ethers and higher polyalkylene oxides are water-insoluble, but they can absorb a considerable amount of water. (3) Organic amines, imines and amides are good synthetic lubricants, since they possess low pour-points and high viscosity-index. They can be used under temperature conditions of -50oC to 250oC (4) Silicones are very good synthetic lubricants, because are not oxidized below 200oC and possess high viscosity-index. (5) Fluorocarbons are not decomposed by heat, not easily oxidizable and chemically inert and resistant to chemicals, except molten sodium. LUBRICATING EMULSIONS An emulsion is two-phase system, consisting of a fairly coarse dispersion of two immiscible liquids, the one being dispersed as fine droplets in the other. The disperse (or the internal) phase is the liquid that is broken into droplets. The surrounding liquid is known as the continuous or external or dispersing phase. Usually, the size of dispersed drop lets varies from 1 to 6 micron. A dispersion system consisting of two immiscible liquids is inherently unstable, and to increase its stability, a third agent, called emulsifier or emulsifying agent, is added. Emulsifiers are compounds exhibiting both polar and non-polar character. The emulsifier molecule contains a hydrophobic-end and a hydrophilic end. Hydrophobic-end of the molecule is preferably wetted by oil; whereas the hydrophilic-end is wetted by water. Thus, emulsifier molecule is adsorbed at the interface of the two phases (oil and water), resulting in the formation of a protective film around the dispersed droplets. A Sodium Soap molecule illustrates well the functioning of an emulsifier. The sodium soap is the sodium salt of a long chain fatty acids like C15H31COONa, possessing a hydrophilic group -COONa and hydrophobic-end, C15H31. Geometric calculations have shown that the maximum amount of dispersed phase in the other liquid can be 74.02% of the total volume. Thus, a water-oil emulsion mixture with less than 26% oil would tend to form an O/W emulsion; whereas a mixture with more than 74% oil would result in a W/O emulsion. Composition between 26 and 74% can result in both types of emulsion. (a) Oil in-water emulsions are obtained by adding oil containing about 3-20% water-soluble emulsifying agent to a suitable quantity of wafer. The most usual emulsifying agents are sodium soaps and sodium and potassium salts of sulphonic acids. The main use of such an emulsion is as cooling and lubricating liquid for cutting tools. Another use is lubrication for certain rather heavy sliding components such as pistons in marine diesel engines and large internal combustion engines. Such emulsions also give rust protection. (b) Water-in-oil emulsions are prepared by 'mixing together water containing about 1 to 10 % water- soluble emulsifier (Like alkaline-earth soap, e.g., calcium stearate) with oil. These emulsions possess much higher viscosity than that of the oil from which they are prepared. An emulsion which uses about 40% water by volume is widely used to lubricate compressors and pneumatic tools. They provide cooling effect (due to the evaporation of water), besides lubrication action. Characteristics: A good lubricant generally possesses the following characteristics: • A high boiling point and low freezing point (in order to stay liquid within a wide range of temperature) • A high viscosity index. • Thermal stability. • Hydraulic stability. • Demulsibility. • Corrosion prevention. • A high resistance to oxidation. • Anti scoring property • Water antiaffinity property • Anti foaming property Anti scoring property: Lubricants should have the property to prevent the scoring failure of tooth surface under high pressure of load. Water anti affinity property: Moisture tends to condense due to temp. change when the gears are stopped. Lubricants should have the property of isolating moisture and water from it. Anti foaming property: Lubricants should form no foam under agitation. More Discussion on property: VISCOSITY INDEX : Viscosity index is an expression of effect of change of temperature on the viscosity of oils. This change can be evaluated numerically and the result is expressed as VI. It Is the avg. Decrease in viscosity of oil per degree rise in temp between 100Of AND 2100F. Silicones, poly glycol ethers, diesters and trimesters have high VI. Drop Point: It is that temp at which grease passes from the semi liquid to liquid state. It determines the upper temp limit for the application of grease. FLASH POINT: Flash point is the temperature at which the oil gives off sufficient vapors which can be ignited. It reflects on the capability of the oil to work at higher temperature without any fire hazard. Cloud point It is the temperature below which wax in diesel forms a cloudy appearance. In general it is that temp at which the lubricant becomes cloudy or hazy when cooled. And that waxes thickens the oil and clogs fuel filters and injectors in engines. pour point is the minimum temperature at which a lubricants turns into semi solid and almost losses its flow characteristic. Both indicate suitability of lubricant in cold conditions and must be low. It reflects on the capability of the oil to work at low temperatures. Iodine Number: It is the no. Of gm. equivalent of I2 to the amount of ICL absorbed by 100 gm of oil. Each oil has specific I N. It determines the extent of contamination of oil/ amount of un saturation in oil. Low IN is good for oil.ICL—Wijs solution. RCH=CHR + ICl →RCHI-CH(Cl)R IN Oil Type Example >150 drying linseed, tung oil 100-150 semidrying castor, soyabeen <100 non-drying olive, cocanut Aniline point: It is the minimum temp at which oil is miscible with equal amount of aniline. It is a measure of aromatic content of an oil. It is an indication of possible determination of rubber sealing. Aniline + sample oil → Homogeneous solution → cloudiness Emulsion Number: It is the property of water to get mixed with oil easily or the reverse. A good lubricating oil should form such an emulsion with water which breaks easily. This is known as demulsification. The time in seconds in which a given volume of oils and water separates out into distinct layers is called demulsification number. A good lubricating oil should have low demulsification number. In cutting oils the higher the emulsification number, better the oil is. Emulsion acts both as lubricant & coolant. It is of the following types. OIW – (26% O+ 74% W) ---- Sodium& potassium salt of sulphuric acid as dispersed phase and water as medium. Milk, Vanishing cream WIO--- (74% O+26% W)----- water as dispersed phase & oil as dispersion medium ( Butter, cold cream) Lubrication Mechanism: Thick Film Mechanism: In this case the sliding surfaces are separated completely by applying a thin uniform film of liquid lubricants between them. The thickness of liquid film is at least 1000 Armstrong. The liquid lubricants do not have any chemical affinity to the metal surface and it sticks to it due to viscosity. The liquid film covers all irregularities in the sliding surface and thus prevents formation of welded junction and hence avoids contact between sliding surface. The liquid lubricant must have between sliding surface. The liquid lubricant must have sufficient viscosity so as to maintain the fluid film in its place. If viscosity is higher, a large amount of energy is required. When the load is applied, the pressure developed in the lubricant is sufficient to keep moving surfaces apart and hence it known as hydrodynamic lubrication. It occurs in journal bearing. This type of lubrication is used in watches, clocks, electric motors, turbines etc. Thin Film/Boundary Lubrication : Boundary lubrication exists when the operating condition are such that it is not possible to establish a full fluid condition, particularly at low relative speeds between the moving or sliding surfaces. The oil film thickness may be reduced to such a degree that metal to metal contact occurs between the moving surfaces. The oil film thickness is so small that oiliness becomes predominant for boundary lubrication. Boundary lubrication happens when • A shaft starts moving from rest. • The speed is very low. • The load is very high. • Viscosity of the lubricant is too low. Examples for boundary lubrication: • Guide and guide shoe in two stroke engine. • Lubrication of the journal bearing in diesel engines (mainly during starting and stopping of engine). • Piston rings and when cylinder liner is at TDC and BDC position when the piston direction changes and if the relative speed is very slow. Extreme pressure Lubrication When the moving or sliding surfaces are under very high pressure and speed, a high local temperature is attained. Under such condition, liquid lubricant fails to stick to the moving parts and may decompose and even vaporize. To meet this extreme pressure condition, special additives are added to the minerals oils. These are called “extreme pressure lubrication." These additives form on the metal surfaces more durable films capable of withstanding high loads and high temperature. Additives are organic compounds like chlorine (as in chlorinated esters), sulphur (as in sulphurized oils), and p hosphorus (as in tricresyl phosphate). Module – 3: CORROSION Corrosion is the gradual deterioration of a metal from its surface due to the chemical or electrochemical interaction with a corrosive environment. It is a diffusion - controlled process so it occurs on exposed surfaces. Types of corrosion: 1) Chemical or Dry 2) Electrochemical or wet Dry corrosion: By oxidation, By other gases, By liquid metal A) Oxidation: Due to direct oxidation of oxygen on metals in the absence of moisture. 2M +nO2→ 2M n+ + 2nO2- →Mn2 O3 At low temp. all alkali and alkaline metals are oxidised easily where as at high temp. except Ag, Au and Pt, all other metals are oxidised. B) Liquid- Metal corrosion: By passing a liquid metal over a solid metal at high temp. which leads to the weakening of the metal surface either due to its dissolution in liquid metal or penetration of liquid metal in to the solid surface. EX) Coolant ( Na metal) leads to corrosion of cadmium in a nuclear reactor. C) Corrosion by other gases : Gases like chlorine and H2S show corrosive effect on a metal surface due to their chemical affinity. 2Ag +Cl2 → 2AgCl ( AgCl coating is protective) Sn +2Cl2 → SnCl4 ( SnCl4 is volatile and hence non-protective) Electrochemical Corrosion: It is mostly through the formation of galvanic cells. It involves mostly separate anode and cathode between which the current flows/ corrosion at anode generates metal ions/ non-metallic ions like OH- & O2- at cathode./ diffusion of ions through the conducting medium/ a single metal partly behaving as anode and cathode due to differential aeration. EX) Rusting of iron : Reactions: Oxidation : Fe – 2e → Fe2+ Reduction : a) Oxygen Absorption 4H+ +O2 +4e →2H2O (Acidic medium) 2H2O+ O2+4e → 4OH- (neutral medium) b) Hydrogen Evolution( Absence of oxygen) : 2H++ 2e → H2 ( Acidic medium) 2H2O +2e → H2 +2OH- (neutral or alkaline) Final Reaction : Fe2+ + 2OH- → Fe(OH)2 . This in presence of excess oxygen oxidised to Fe(OH)3. Which is RUST, Fe2O3.3H2O. Pilling Bedworth Rule: Ratio of the volume of the oxide film/ coating formed to the volume of the metal consumed. P. B Ratio = volume of metal oxide/ volume of metal Also known as specific volume, it carries significance for determining rate of corrosion. case-1 → volume of oxide > volume of metal, PBR > 1, Protective ( Ti, Al, Cr, Cu) case-2 → volume of oxide < volume of metal, PBR < 1, Non protective ( Li, Na, K, Mg) case-3 → volume of oxide >> volume of metal, PBR > 2, Non protective (Mo, W, Nb) Metal PBR Pb 1.4 Ni 1.52 Cr 1.99 Cu 1.68 K 0.45 Li 0.78 Nb 2.61 TYPES OF ELECTROCHEMICAL CORROSION PITTING CORROSION Pitting is one of the most destructive types of corrosion, as it can be hard to predict, detect and characterize. Pitting is a localized form of corrosion, in which either a local anodic point, or more commonly a cathodic point, forms a small corrosion cell with the surrounding normal surface. Once a pit has initiated, it grows into a “hole” or “cavity” that takes on one of a variety of different shapes. Pits typically penetrate from the surface downward in a vertical direction. Pitting corrosion can be caused by a local break or damage to the protective oxide film or a protective coating; it can also be caused by non-uniformities in the metal structure itself. Pitting is dangerous because it can lead to failure of the structu re with a relatively low overall loss of metal. CREVICE CORROSION Crevice corrosion is also a localized form of corrosion and usually results from a stagnant microenvironment in which there is a difference in the concentration of ions between two areas of a metal. Crevice corrosion occurs in shielded areas such as those under washers, bolt heads, gaskets, etc. where oxygen is restricted. These smaller areas allow for a corrosive agent to enter but do not allow enough circulation within, depleting the oxy gen content, which prevents re-passivation. As a stagnant solution builds, pH shifts away from neutral. This growing imbalance between the crevice (microenvironment) and the external surface (bulk environment) contributes to higher rates of corrosion. Crev ice corrosion can often occur at lower temperatures than pitting. Proper joint design helps to minimize crevice corrosion. INTERGRANULAR CORROSION An examination of the microstructure of a metal reveals the grains that form during solidification of the alloy, as well as the grain boundaries between them. Intergranular corrosion can be caused by impurities present at these grain boundaries or by the depletion or enrichment of an alloying element at the grain boundaries. Intergranular corrosion occurs along or adjacent to these grains, seriously affecting the mechanical properties of the metal while the bulk of the metal remain intact. An example of intergranular corrosion is carbide precipitation, a chemical reaction that can occur when a metal is subjected to very high temperatures (e.g., 800°F - 1650°F) and/or localized hot work such as welding. In stainless steels, during these reactions, carbon “consumes” the chromium, forming carbides and causing the level of chromium remaining in the alloy to drop below the 11% needed to sustain the spontaneously-forming passive oxide layer. 304L and 316L are enhanced chemistries of 304 and 316 stainless that contain lower levels of carbon, and would provide the best corrosion resistance to carbide precipitation. STRESS CORROSION CRACKING (SCC) Stress corrosion cracking (SCC) is a result of the combination of tensile stress and a corrosive environment, often at elevated temperatures. Stress corrosion may result from external stress such as actual tensile loads on the metal or expansion/contraction due to rapid temperature changes. It may also result from residual stress imparted during the manufacturing process such as from cold forming, welding, machining, grinding, etc. In stress corrosion, the majority of the surface usually remains intact; however, fine cracks appear in the microstructure, making the corrosion hard to detect. The cracks typically have a brittle appearance and form and spread in a direction perpendicular to the location of the stress. Selecting proper materials for a given environment (including temperature and management of external loads) can mitigate the potential for catastrophic failure due to SCC. GALVANIC CORROSION Galvanic corrosion is the degradation of one metal near a joint or juncture that occurs when two electrochemically dissimilar metals are in electrical contact in an electrolytic environment; for example, when copper is in contact with steel in a saltwater environment. However, even when these three conditions are satisfied, there are many other factors that affect the potential for, and the amount of, corrosion, such as temperature and surface finish of the metals. Large engineered systems employing many types of metal in their construction, including various fastener types and materials, are susceptible to galvanic corrosion if care is not exercised during the design phase. Choosing metals that are as close together as practicable on the galvanic series helps reduce the risk of galvanic corrosion. CONCLUSION In aqueous environments, metals may be exposed to not only uniform corrosion, but also to various types of local corrosion including pitting, crevice, intergranular, stress, and galvanic corrosion. In areas where corrosion is a concern, stainless steel products offer value and protection against these threats. Stainless’ favorable chemical composition makes it resistant to many common corrosives while remaining significantly more affordable than specialty alloys such as titanium and Inconel® alloys. Stainless steel is a highly alloyed, low-carbon steel with a high (at least 11%) chromium content. When exposed to an oxygenated environment, the chromium reacts to form a passive oxide layer on the metal’s surface, slowing further oxidation and providing a self- healing quality, which helps resist uniform and local corrosion. Nickel helps to stabilize the microstructure, increasing SCC resistance. Metal corrosion is a slow process of destruction of metal objects, after chemical reactions that occur on the surface of metals, alloys, under the action of the environment. Corrosion process is influenced by a number of internal and external factors. Factors affecting rate of corrosion: Several factors affecting the rate of the corrosion, which can be divided into two parts: 1) Factors affecting on metal (related to the metal) 2) Factors affecting on corrosive environment. Factors affecting the metals: 1. Nature of the metal: The tendency of the metal to undergo corrosion is mainly dependent on the nature of the metal. IN general the metal with lower el ectrode potential have more reactive and more susceptible for corrosion and metal with high electrode potential are less reactive and less susceptible for corrosion for egs: metals like K, Na, Mg, Zn etc have low electrode potential are undergo corrosion very easily, where as noble metals like Ag, Au, Pt have higher electrode potential, their corrosion rate are negligible but there are few exception for this general trend as some metals show the property of passivity like Al, Cr, Ti, Ta etc. 2. Surface state of the metal or nature of the corrosion product (passivity): The corrosion product is usually the oxide of the metal; the nature of the product determines the rate of further corrosion process. If the oxide layer, which forms on the surface, is stoichiometric, highly insoluble and non-porous in nature with low ionic and electronic conductivity then that type of products layer effectively prevents further corrosion, which acts as a protective film. For egs: Al, Cr, Ti develop such a layer on their surf ace and become passive to corrosion and some metal like Ta, Zr and Mo not only forms such a protective layers but are capable of self repairing oxide films when it is damaged. Hence these are extremely passive metals. If the oxide layer forms on the metal surface is non-stochiometric, soluble, unstable and porous in nature and have an appreciable conductivity, they cannot control corrosion on the metal surface for egs: oxide layer formed on metals like Zn, Fe, Mg etc. 3. Anodic and Cathodic area: The rate of the corrosion is greatly influenced by the relative sizes of cathodic and anodic areas. If the metal has smaller the anodic area and larger the cathodic area exposed to corrosive atmosphere, more intense and faster is the corrosion occurring at anodic area because at anode oxidation takes place and electrons are liberated. At the cathode these electrons are consumed. When anode is smaller and cathode region is larger all the liberated electrons at anode are rapidly consumed. This process makes the anodic reaction to takes place at its maximum rate thus increasing the corrosion rate. If the cathode is smaller and reverse process takes place decrease rate of corrosion. For egs: If tin (Sn) coated on iron (Fe) and in that some area are not covered or some pin holes are left, there forms smaller anodic area and larger cathodic area because tin is cathodic with respect to iron so intense localized corrosion takes place. On the other hand if Zn coated to Fe then if there are some pin holes are there creates larger anodic area and smaller cathodic area because Fe is cathodic with respect to zinc so that rate of corrosion is veryless. 4. Hydrogen over voltage: A metal with low hydrogen over voltage on its surface is more susceptible for corrosion. When the cathodic reaction is hydrogen evolution type with low hydrogen over voltage, liberation of H2 gas is more easier so that cathodic reaction is very fast, that makes anodic reaction faster hence overall corrosion process is very fast. If the H2 over voltage is high so cathodic reaction is slow hence corrosion reaction also slower. Corrosion Protection & Prevention: In virtually all situations, metal corrosion can be managed, slowed, or even stopped by using the proper techniques. Corrosion prevention can take a number of forms depending on the circumstances of the metal being corroded. Corrosion prevention techniques can be generally classified into 6 groups: 1) Environmental Modification Corrosion is caused by chemical interactions between metal and gasses in the surrounding environment. By removing the metal from, or changing, the type of environment, metal deterioration can be immediately reduced. This may be as simple as limiting contact with rain or seawater by storing metal materials indoors or could be in the form of direct manipulation of the environment affecting the metal. Methods to reduce the sulfur, chloride, or oxygen content in the surrounding environment can limit the speed of metal corrosion. For example, feed water for water boilers can be treated with softeners or other chemical media to adjust the hardness, alkalinity or oxygen content in order to reduce corrosion on the interior of the unit. 2)Metal Selection and Surface Conditions No metal is immune to corrosion in all environments, but through monitoring and understanding the environmental conditions that are the cause of corrosion, changes to the type of metal being used can also lead to significant reductions in corrosion. Metal corrosion resistance data can be used in combination with information on the environmental conditions to make decisions regarding the suitability of each metal. The development of new alloys, designed to protect against corrosion in specific environments, is constantly under production. Hastelloy nickel alloys, Nirosta steels, and Timetal titanium alloys are all examples of alloys designed for corrosion prevention. Monitoring of surface conditions is also critical in protecting against metal deterioration from corrosion. Cracks, crevices or asperous surfaces, whether a result of operational requirements, wear and tear, or manufacturing flaws, all can result in greater rates of corrosion. Proper monitoring and the elimination of unnecessarily vulnerable surface conditions, along with taking steps to ensure that systems are designed to avoid reactive metal combinations and that corrosive agents are not used in the cleaning or maintenance of metal parts are all also part of effective corrosion reduction program. 3)Cathodic Protection Galvanic corrosion occurs when two different metals are situated together in a corrosive electrolyte. This a common problem for metals submerged together in seawater, but can also occur when two dissimilar metals are immersed in close proximity in moist soils. For these reasons, galvanic corrosion often attacks ship hulls, offshore rigs, and oil and gas pipelines. Cathodic protection works by converting unwanted anodic (active) sites on a metal's surface to cathodic (passive) sites through the application of an opposing current. This opposing current supplies free electrons and force local anodes to be polarized to the potential of the local cathodes. Cathodic protection can take two forms. The first is the introduction of galvanic anodes. This method, known as a sacrificial system, uses metal anodes, introduced to the electrolytic environment, to sacrifice themselves (corrode) in order to protect the cathode. While the metal needing protection can vary, sacrificial anodes are generally made of zinc, aluminum, or magnesium, metals that have the most negative electro-potential. The galvanic series provides a comparison of the different electro-potential - or nobility - of metals and alloys. In a sacrificial system, metallic ions move from the anode to the cathode, which leads the anode to corrode more quickly than it otherwise would. As a result, the anode must regularly be replaced. The second method of cathodic protection is referred to as impressed current protection. This method, which is often used to protect buried pipelines and ship hulls, requires an alternative source of direct electrical current to be supplied to the electrolyte. The negative terminal of the current source is connected to the metal, while the positive terminal is attached to an auxiliary anode, which is added to complete the electrical circuit. Unlike a galvanic (sacrificial) anode system, in an impressed current protection system, the auxiliary anode is not sacrificed. 4)Inhibitors Corrosion inhibitors are chemicals that react with the metal's surface or the environmental gasses causing corrosion, thereby, interrupting the chemical reaction that causes corrosion. Inhibitors can work by adsorbing themselves on the metal's surface and forming a protective film. These chemicals can be applied as a solution or as a protective coating via dispersion techniques. The inhibitor's process of slowing corrosion depends upon: • Changing the anodic or cathodic polarization behavior • Decreasing the diffusion of ions to the metal's surface • Increasing the electrical resistance of the metal's surface Major end-use industries for corrosion inhibitors are petroleum refining, oil and gas exploration, chemical production and water treatment facilities. The benefit of corrosion inhibitors is that they can be applied in-situ to metals as a corrective action to counter unexpected corrosion. 5)Coatings Paints and other organic coatings are used to protect metals from the degradative effect of environmental gasses. Coatings are grouped by the type of polymer employed. Common organic coatings include: • Alkyd and epoxy ester coatings that, when air dried, promote cross-link oxidation • Two-part urethane coatings • Both acrylic and epoxy polymer radiation curable coatings • Vinyl, acrylic or styrene polymer combination latex coatings • Water-soluble coatings • High-solid coatings • Powder coatings 6)Plating Metallic coatings, or plating, can be applied to inhibit corrosion as well as provide aesthetic, decorative finishes. There are four common types of metallic coatings but the common one is given below. • Electroplating: A thin layer of metal - often nickel, tin, or chromium - is deposited on the substrate metal (generally steel) in an electrolytic bath. The electrolyte usually consists of a water solution containing salts of the metal to be deposited. Questions: 1. Which series ( Galvanic/ Electrochemical) predicts the relative corrosive tendencies of a metal? 2. Galvanic corrosion is also differential metal corrosion. 3. Out of copper, chromium and iron which is unstable and protective? 4. State the reason for : wire mesh corrodes faster at the joints./ corrosion occurs in steel pipe connected to copper plumbing 5. How to prevent corrosion of metals due to moisture? 6. Give basic difference between galvanization and tinning. 7. soil having more porosity will have high corrosion. 8. Hygroscopic suspended particles cause more corrosion. 9. Annealing is a useful process. 10. Smaller the grain size of metal, faster is corrosion. 11. SO2 and H2S increase corrosion. 12. L,T and V type joints should be avoided. 13. Sn undergoes severe corrosion in presence of chlorine but not Ag. 14. Sn-coated iron articles are free from any damage. 15. Part of nail inside the wood undergoes corrosion. 16. Bolts and nuts may be made of same metals. 17. Deposition of small dust particles on metal surface must be avoided. 18. Mg sheets are best suited for protection. 19. Brass containers are not cleaned by alkaline solution. 20. Justify that corrosion is a diffusion process. Module – 4: ENERGY SCIENCE A fuel is any combustible material that can be made to react with other substances so that it releases energy. Types of Fuels: Fuels can be generally classified into two types. 1. On the basis of their fuels state/ physical state of aggregation: • Solid Fuels • Liquid Fuels • Gaseous Fuels 2. On the basis of their occurrence/ source: • Natural Fuels • Artificial Fuels Examples of Fuels: Natural Fuels Artificial Fuels Solid Fuels Wood, Coal, Oil Shale Tanbark, Bagasse, Straw, Charcoal, Coke Coal, Briquettes Liquid Fuels Petroleum Gaseous Fuels Natural Gas Oils from distillation of petroleum, Coal Tar, LPG, Shale-Oil, Alcohols, etc. Coal gas, Bio gas, CNG Producer Gas, Water Gas, Hydrogen, Acetylene, Blast Furnace Gas, Oil Gas Solid Fuels Advantages: • Easier transportation and storage. • Low production cost. • Moderate ignition temperature. Disadvantages: • Large portion of energy is wasted. • Cost of handling is high and controlling is also hard. • Ash content is high & burn with clinker formation. Liquid Fuels: Advantages: • Higher calorific value per unit mass. • Burn without ash, clinkers, etc. • Controlling the combustion is easier. • Transportation easier through pipes and stored indefinitely without loss. • Loss of energy is comparatively lower. • Require less furnace space for combustion. Disadvantages: • Cost of liquid fuel is much higher compared to solid fuel. • Storage methods are costlier. • Greater risk of fire hazards. • Special burning equipment required for more efficient combustion. Gaseous Fuels: Advantages: • Transportation through pipes is easy. • Sparking combustion is really easy. • They have a higher heat content. • Clean after use. • Do not require any special burner technology. Disadvantages: • Large storage tanks required. • As they are highly inflammable, the chance for fire hazards are extremely high and strict safety measures need to be followed. Fossil Fuel: Fossil fuels are the dead and decayed remains of plants and animals subjected to decades of pressure and temperature under the earth’s crust. Primarily fossil fuels are hydrocarbons. They are convenient and effective. They provide the calorific value required to fulfill our needs. Even though they are available in plenty right now, they are a non -renewable source of energy. The burning of fossil fuels is responsible for a large section of the world’s pollution index. Types of fossil fuels: • Coal • Oil • Natural Gas Characteristics of a good fuel 1) High calorific value 2) Moderate ignition temp as low temp can cause fire hazard where as high value makes it difficult to ignite.3) low moisture content 4) low non -combustible matter. Other factors include moderate rate of combustion, low cost, uniform size. calorific value (plural calorific values): The amount of energy produced by the complete combustion of a material or fuel. Measured in units of energy per amount of material, e.g. kJ/kg. The amount of energy available from an item of food when digested, mostly from carbohydrates and fats. The calorific value is a characteristic for each substance. It is measured in units of energy per unit of the substance, usually mass, such as: kcal/kg, kJ/kg, J/mol, Btu/m³. Heating value is commonly determined by use of a bomb calorimeter. 1 calorie--- Heat required to increase temp. of 1gm of water through 10c. 1 B.Th. U---- Amount of heat reqd. to raise temp of 1 pound of water through 10F. Centrigrade Heat Unit----Quanty of heat required to raise temp. of 1 pound of water through 10c. 1 Kcal =39.68 B.Th.U =2.2C.H.U HCV: HCV is the amount of heat or energy liberated from the combustion of a fuel when its byproducts are condensed to recover some of the energy released from the combustion. In comparison, LCV is the amount of energy liberated from the combustion of a fuel when its byproducts freely escape. During the use of any fuel, water vapors and moisture etc. escape as such along with the combustion gases. As they are not condensed, a lower amount of heat is available. LCV = HCV- Latent heat of vapors formed Since 1 part by mass of hydrogen produces 9 parts by mass of water. Hence, LCV= HCV— mass of H2 × Latent heat of steam Latent heat of steam = 587Kcal/Kg or 1060 B.T.U/lb Unit Conversion: 1Kcal/Kg = 1.8 B. T .U 1Kcal/ m3 = 0.1077 B.T.U/ft3 1B.T.U/ft3 = 9.3 K cal/ m3 Calculation If oxygen is present in the fuel, it is in the combination with H2 as fixed hydrogen (H2O). 2H2 +O2 → 2H2O 8 parts of O2combine with1 part of H2. Fixed hydrogen = mass of oxygen in fuel/ 8 Amount of H2 available for combustion =Total mass of H2 in the fuel – fixed H2 =(H-O/8) H2O formed from 1 gm of H2 = 9 gm H2O formed from H/100 gm of H2 = 9X H/100 gm = 0.09H gm Latent Heat of steam = 587 cal/gm, Latent heat of water vapour = 0.09H X 587 cal/gm. LCV = HCV-0.09X587 cal/gm Theoretical Calculation of calorific value of a fuel: Calorific value of a fuel is the sum of the calorific value of all components present. Constituent Hydrogen Carbon Sulphur HCV(Kcal/Kg) 34,500 8080 2420 Dulong’s Formula : HCV = 1/100[8080C +34500(H-O/8) +2240S] Kcal/kg Calorific value of Fuels: Wood - 2500 kcal/kg CNG-- 4900 kcal/m3 Producer gas- 2800 kcal/m3 Natural gas---12000 kcal/kg LPG—27800 kcal/kg Kerosene—11100 kcal/kg Diesel- 11000 kcal/kg Petrol—11250 kcal/kg Electricity--- 860 kcal/kwh Fractional distillation of crude oil: Fractional distillation separates a mixture into a number of different parts, called fractions. A tall fractionating column is fitted above the mixture, with several condensers coming off at different heights. The column is hot at the bottom and cool at the top. Substances with high boiling points condense at the bottom and substances with lower boiling points condense on the way to the top. Crude oil is a mixture of hydrocarbons. The crude oil is evaporated and its vapours condense at different temperatures fraction contains hydrocarbon molecules with a similar number of carbon atoms and a similar range of boiling points. fractionating column. Each the in Oil fractions: The diagram below summarizes the main fractions from crude oil and their uses, and the trends in properties. Note that the gases leave at the top of the column, the liquids condense in the middle and the solids stay at the bottom. The fractionating column As we go up the fractionating column, the hydrocarbons have: 1. lower boiling points 2. lower viscosity (they flow more easily) 3. higher flammability (they ignite more easily). The various components of crude oil have different sizes, weights and boiling temperatures; so, the first step is to separate these components. Because they have different boiling temperatures, they can be separated easily by a process called fractional distillation. The steps of fractional distillation are as follows: 1. You heat the mixture of two or more substances (liquids) with different boiling points to a high temperature. Heating is usually done with high pressure steam to temperatures of about 1112 degrees Fahrenheit / 600 degrees Celsius. 2. The mixture boils, forming vapor (gases); most substances go into the vapor phase . 3. The vapor enters the bottom of a long column (fractional distillation column) that is filled with trays or plates. The trays have many holes or bubble caps (like a loosened cap on a soda bottle) in them to allow the vapor to pass through. They increase the contact time between the vapor and the liquids in the column and help to collect liquids that form at various heights in the column. There is a temperature difference across the column (hot at the bottom, cool at the top). 4. The vapor rises in the column. 5. As the vapor rises through the trays in the column, it cools. 6. When a substance in the vapor reaches a height where the temperature of the column is equal to that substance's boiling point, it will condense to form a liquid. (The substance with the lowest boiling point will condense at the highest point in the column; substances with higher boiling points will condense lower in the column.). 7. The trays collect the various liquid fractions. 8. The collected liquid fractions may pass to condensers, which cool them further, and then go to storage tanks, or they may go to other areas for further chemical processing Fractional distillation is useful for separating a mixture of substances with narrow differences in boiling points, and is the most important step in the refining process. Before fractional distillation, water is separated by Cottrell’s process which allows the oil to flow between two highly charged electrodes. The colloidal water-droplets coalesce to form a large drop, which separate out. Similarly, harmful ‘S’ compounds can be removed by treatment with copper oxide to give solid copper sulphide that is filtered out. Diesel Cheaper, less consumption per unit power produced, Thermal efficiency higher, Exhaust gases contain less pollutants( CO2, Hydrocarbon), Expensive fuel injection device Petrol costilier, more consumption., lower thermal efficiency, Emit higher pollutants, simple IC engine Refining of gasoline: Very much necessary as it contains some undesirable unsaturated hydrocarbons and sulphur compounds. The former gets oxidized & polymerized, thus causing gums & sludge formation on storing. Sulphur compounds corrode IC engines. Process: Sulphur compounds are generally removed by treating with alkaline solution of sodium plumbite with controlled addition of sulphur. This process is called ‘Sweetening of petrol’ .Final conversion is known as ‘Doctor’s Process’. 2RSH + Na2Pbo2 → Pb(SR)2 +2NaOH Pb(SR)2 →PbSs + RSSR The disulphides are extracted with a suitable solvent. Olefins & colouring matters of gasoline are removed by percolating gasoline through Fuller’s earth , which adsorbs the other olefins & colours. After refining, some inhibitors are added. These retard oxidation process thereby improving the storing. Cracking of petrol: Cracking, in petroleum refining, is the process by which heavy hydrocarbon molecules are broken up into lighter molecules by means of heat and usually pressure and sometimes catalysts. Cracking is the most important process for the commercial production of gasoline and diesel fuel. C10H22 → C5H12 + C5H10 Decane n-pentane pentene Types of Cracking Thermal Cracking and Catalytic Cracking. Cracking is a process by which complex high molecular weight organic compounds are broken down into smaller fragments of molecules. The complex high molecular weight organic compounds are generally long chained hydrocarbons such as petroleum. Thermal is further divided in to liquid & vapour phase. Catalytic is of fixed bed & moving bed. Thermal cracking: No catalyst used heavy oils are subjected to high temp & pressure. Characteristics Liquid Phase Vapour phase Cracking temp Pressure Yield of petrol Octane rating Time reqd. 475-5300c 100 kg/cm2 50-60 % 65-70 600-630 10-20 KG/ cm2 > 60% > 70 More less Catalytic Cracking: Much lower temp& pressure than thermal/ Suitable catalyst used are Al2O3, Al2 ( SiO3)3, Better yield & quality, a low pressure reqd / no undesired product as majority escapes as H2S / product with high octane rating/ use of selective catalyst/ no external fuel needed as fuel comes from coal embedded in catalyst. Knocking: In an internal-combustion engine, sharp sounds caused by premature combustion of part of the compressed air-fuel mixture in the cylinder. In a properly functioning engine, the charge burns with the flame front progressing smoothly from the point of ignition across the combustion chamber. However, at high compression ratios, depending on the composition of the fuel, some of the charge may spontaneously ignite ahead of the flame front and burn in an uncontrolled manner, producing intense high-frequency pressure waves. These pressure waves force parts of the engine to vibrate, which produces an audible knock. Compression ratio (CR) is the ratio of gaseous volume(V1) in the cylinder at the end of the suction-stroke to the volume(V2) at the end of compression –stroke of the piston. As V2 < V1, CR = V1/V2 > 1. The ‘CR’ at which the fuel tends to knock is known as ‘critical compression ratio’. Consequences: Knocking can cause overheating of the spark-plug points, erosion of the combustion chamber surface, and rough, inefficient operation. It can be avoided by adjusting certain variables of engine design and operation, such as compression ratio and burning time; but the most common method is to burn gasoline of higher octane number. Higher the octane number, the more compression from the piston the gasoline can withstand before igniting in the engine. The ability for gasoline to withstand being compressed is most important for vehicles that run on traditional gasoline. The octane number of gasoline is a measure of its resistance to knock. The octane number is determined by comparing the characteristics of a gasoline to isooctane (2,2,4- that compound trimethylpentane) and heptane. Isooctane is assigned an octane number of 100. It is a highly branched knock. Octanerating canbe improved with octane boosters such as ethanol, di ethyl Telluride ,methanol, MTBE, ETBE (all oxygenated and somewhat safe) or other chemicals. In the past it was usually TEL (lead based, which were banned in the mid-70's since they're toxic and also destroyed the car's catalytic converters). smoothly, burns little with Tetra ethyl Lead: (C2H5)2pb forms Pb and PbO particles which react as chain reaction inhibitors by slowing down the chain oxidation reaction responsible for early detonation leading to knocking sound. 1)Presence of ‘S’ reduces the efficiency of TEL . So, desulphurised Gasoline is used. 2) Pb & PbO2 decrease engine life so these are removed as follows, Pb + C2H4Br2 → PbBr2 + C2H4, PbBr2 is volatile so escapes along with exhaust gas. 3) Another cause of pollution is incomplete combustion leading to the formation of CO X, NOX etc. Hence catalytic convertors based on Pt are employed to carry out catalytic combustion reaction. But lead present in exhaust gas poisons active sites in the catalyst. Catalytic converter is a Pt or Rh based compound which helps to convert more poisonous CO to CO 2. CO → CO2. But Pt is poisoned by Pb, hence the need for unleaded petrol. MTBE : It is preferred as it contains oxygen in the form of ether group and supplies oxygen for combustion there by reducing the formation of peroxy compound. Its advantage is that it permits use of catalytic converter. Octane numbers: o The octane number of a fuel is based on how fuels auto ignite, under compression. o It is based on the scale where isooctane is 100 (minimal ignition under pressure) and heptane is 0 (easily ignites under pressure). o For example, a petrol with an octane number of 92 has the same knock as a mixture of 92% isooctane and 8% heptane. o Octane rating decreases with an increase in the carbon chain length. o Octane ratings increase with carbon chain branching. o Octane ratings increase in aromatics with same number of carbons. o It is important to know octane numbers for petrol because the auto ignition of fuels causes a knocking effect in petrol engines. This is where it ignites twice; once due to the high pressure and again when the spark ignites the petrol. This causes the car engine to be less efficient and it can also damage the engine. o However, diesel engines rely on this knocking effect, as they have no spark plugs and rely on the effect of compression to make their fuel/air mixtures ignite. o Octane rating order is given in decreasing order as: n-alkanes > mono substituted alkanes> cyclic alkanes > alkenes > alkenes > poly substituted alkenes > aromatics. Similarly for straight chain hydrocarbons, n-hexane > n-pentane > n-butane ‘Octane Rating’ was introduced by Graham Edger in 1872 which gave n-heptane with zero with iso octane 100. The best gasoline known as 80-octane fuel is having 80:20 combination of iso octane & n-heptane. How octane rating of a fuel can be increased? o There are two ways to increase the octane number of a fuel. One is to put special additives into the fuel which discourage auto ignition, and the other is to blend high - octane fuels in with the ordinary petrol. The right kind of alkane: o The best kind of alkane for fuels is not the most plentiful in crude oil. o The shorter the alkane chain, the higher the octane number. However, the volatility of the hydrocarbon increases with a decrease in the chain length. o The short alkane chains have to be mixed in petrol to lower their volatility and higher the octane number of the petrol. o The other factor that affects the octane number is the degree of branching in the alkane chain. The more branched the alkane is, the higher the octane number. o Crude oil contains both straight-chain and branched alkanes, but it does not contain enough branched alkanes to give it a high octane number. o But this can be solved by increasing the octane numbers by isomerism, reforming and cracking. Isomerism o Isomerization involves heating up straight chained alkanes in the presence of suitable catalysts, so that the chains break. o When the chains join together again, they are more likely to be branched. o Oil refineries do this on a large scale with C6H14 and C5H12. o The isomerization reaction is reversible and higher temperatures favour the production of straight chained isomers. However the temperature cannot be too low or the reaction would take too long, so a compromise is made between yield and rate of reaction. The temperature used is 250oC. o The catalyst involved in the isomerization is platinum; the products are then passed over a form of zeolite, which acts as a molecular sieve, separating the straight chains from the branched chains. Cetane Number OR Rating: It is a measure of the ignition value of a diesel fuel that represents the percentage by volume of cetane( Hexadecane,C16H34 ) in a mixture of liquid methylnaphthalene that gives the same ignition lag as the oil being tested. Cetane is a colorless, liquid hydrocarbon (a molecule from the alkane series) that ignites easily under compression. For this reason, it was given a base rating of 100 and is used as the standard measure of the performance of compression ignition fuels, such as diesel and biodiesel. All the sundry hydrocarbon constituents of diesel fuel are measured and indexed against cetane's base-100 rating. Cetane rating is given as: n-alkane > napthalenes > alkenes > branched alkanes > aromatics From Left to Right: Ignition delay increases, Ignition quality decreases, Cetane number decreases Cetane Number (Significance) Similar to the octane number rating that's applied to gasoline to rate its ignition stability, the cetane number is the rating assigned to diesel fuel to rate its combustion quality. While gasoline's octane number signifies its ability to resist auto-ignition (also referred to as pre- ignition, knocking, pinging, or detonation), diesel's cetane number is a measure of the fuel's delay of ignition time (the amount of time between the injection of fuel into the combustion chamber and the actual start of combustion of the fuel charge). Because diesel engines rely on compression ignition (no spark), the fuel must be able to auto- ignite—and generally, the quicker the better. A higher cetane numbe r means a shorter ignition delay time and more complete combustion of the fuel charge in the combustion chamber. This, of course, translates into a smoother running, better performing engine. Cetane number requirements depend mainly on engine design, size , speed of operation, and load variations—and to a slightly lesser extent, atmospheric conditions. Conversely, running a diesel engine on fuel with a lower-than-recommended cetane number can result in rough operation (noise and vibration), low power output, excessive deposits and wear, and hard starting. Cetane Numbers of Various Diesel Fuels: Normal modern highway diesel engines run best with a fuel rated between 45 and 55. The following list of cetane numbers denotes varying grades and types of compression ignition diesel fuels: • Regular diesel: 48 • Premium diesel: 55 • Biodiesel (B100): 55 • Biodiesel blend (B20): 50 • Synthetic diesel: 55 • Commonly High speed diesel( 45-60), Low speed(~25). Additives to raise cetane number : Alkyl nitrates (principally 2-ethylhexyl nitrate) and di- tert-butyl peroxide , acetone peroxide are used as additives to raise the cetane number. Liquid Fuels: LPG: It is obtained as a by product during cracking of heavy oils or natural gas. It is dehydrated, desulphurised & traces of odorous organic sulphides (Mercaptans) is added to give warnings of gas leak. LPG is supplied under pressure in containers under various trade name. Its calorific value is 27,800 Kcal/m3. It consists of hydrocarbons of such volatility so that it can exist as gas under atmospheric pressure but can also be easily liquefied under pressure. Mainly consists of n-butane,, isobutene, butylenes and propane with little or no amount of ethane and propylene. Advantages over Gasoline: High knock-resistant, cheaper, burns cleanly where as disadvantages include its handling only under pressure with not being easily detectable. Non-Petroleum Fuels: Mostly used as an alternative fuel. Power Alcohol : Fuel containing 25% ethanol. C12H22O11 + H2O → C6H12O6 + C6H12O6 (In presence of Invertase) C6H12O6 → 2C2H5OH + 2CO2(In presence of Zymase) The above process takes 36 to 38 hours for complete fermentation. The fermented liquid(WASH) contains about 18-20% alcohol. The wash is then fractionally distilled to get “Rectified Spirit”(90-95% alcohol). To get absolute alcohol(100 %), the rectified spirit is digested with lime for 2 days and distilled. Natural Gases: It is called ‘Wet Gas’ and it is processed to remove propane, propene, butane and butane. When the gas is associated with crude oil, it is called ‘dry gas’. Approximate component of natural gas: CH4 = 70%, C2H6 = 5-10%, H2 =3%,(CO + CO2) = Rest, calorific value = 12000-14000 kcal/ m3 or (12500 kcal/kg.) CNG : A natural gas compressed to a high pressure of about 1000 atm Say a steel cylinder containing 15 kg of CNG contains 2x104 or 20m3of natural gas at 1 atm. pressure. It is a good substitute for petrol or diesel as it gives no sulphur or nitrogen during combustion and no carbon particles. Coal Gas: When coal is carbonized or heated in the absence of air at about 13000c, we get coal gas. Coal → coke + coal gas Properties: It is a colourless gas having a characteristic odour. It is lighter than air and burns with a long smoky flame. Avg. composition: H2 =40%, CH4 = 32%, CO =7%, C2H2=2%, C2H4 =4%, N2 =4%, CO2=1% and rest =4%. Calorific value = 4,900Kcal/ m3 Uses; As a fuel/ In metallurgical operations for providing reducing atmosphere. Oil Gas : Prepared by cracking of Kerosene oil in a coal-fixed furnace. C12H26 → CH4+ C2H6+C2H2+ C2H4+ C3H8 Calorific value is 4500-5400 Kcal/ m3. It is used as a laboratory gas with the composition, CH4 =25-30%, H2=50-55%, CO= 10-20%, CO2 = 3% Producer Gas: A mixture of combustible gases (CO + NO2) associated with a large amount of non-combustible gases like N2, CO2. It is prepared bypassing air mixed with a little of steam over a red hot coal bed maintained at about 10000c in a special reactor, called ‘Gas Producer’. Calorific value =1300 Kcal/m3, Avg. composition ; CO =22.3%, H2 =8.12%, N2= 52%, CO2 =3%. Uses: Useful for heating in a furnace, muffle furnace, , retorts or as a reducing agent in metallurgical operation. Water Gas: A mixture of combustible gases( CO2+ H2) with a little amount of non- combustible gases like CO2 and N2. It is produced by passing alternatively steam and little air through a bed of red hot coal/ coke maintained at about 900-10000C in a reactor. C +H2O → CO + H2 -29Kcal/mole Calorific Value = 2800 Kcal/m3 Avg. composition : H2= 51%, CO=41%, N2 =4%, CO2 = 4% Uses; A source of H2, an illuminating gas, as a fuel also known as ‘Blue Gas’ Synthetic Fuel: A liquid or a gaseous fuel obtained from syn gas ( a mixture of CO & H2) where as Syn gas is derived from gasification of coal gas or biomass. BATTERY SCIENCE: A battery is a device consisting of one or more electrochemical cells with external connections for powering electrical devices such as flashlights, mobile phones, and electric cars. When a battery is supplying electric power, its positive terminal is the cathode and its negative terminal is the anode. The terminal marked negative is the source of electrons that will flow through an external electric circuit to the positive terminal. When a battery is connected to an external electric load, a redox reaction converts high-energy reactants to lower-energy products, and the free-energy difference is delivered to the external circuit as electrical energy. Primary (single-use or "disposable") batteries are used once and discarded, as the electrode materials are irreversibly changed during discharge; a common example is flashlights and a multitude of portable electronic the alkaline battery used devices. Secondary (rechargeable) batteries can discharge and recharged multiple times using an applied electric current; the original composition of the electrodes can be restored by reverse current. Examples include the lead-acid batteries used in vehicles and lithium- ion batteries used for portable electronics such as laptops and mobile phones. for DRY CELL: Dry cell or Leclanche cell is a primary cell having a zinc anode, a carbon (graphite) cathode surrounded by manganese dioxide, and a paste containing ammonium chloride as electrolyte. The electromotive force (emf) produced by a dry cell is 1.5 V. Dry cell is not reversible and therefore have a limited life time. Dry cell batterie s create electrical energy by converting chemical energy into electricity. These materials are placed within the electrolyte paste within the battery. They react with each other through a chemical process in which the electrolyte (carbon or manganese dioxide) reacts with the zinc, creating electricity perating life. Advantages of Leclanche’ Battery 1. The cost of this battery cell is quite low. 2. Various shapes, sizes and capacities of these cells are easily available. 3. Long traditional reliability. Disadvantages of Leclanche’ Battery 1. Its energy density is quite low. 2. It gives poor service in low temperature. 3. It has poor leakage resistance. 4. Cannot perform efficiently at high current drain application. 5. Self-life is not very good. 6. Its voltage falls steadily with discharge. The overall reaction occurring in the dry cell produces 1.5 volts: anode Zn(s) Zn2+(aq) + 2e– cathode 2 e– + 2NH4 +(aq) 2 NH3(g) + H2(g) 2 NH3(g) + Zn+2 (aq) [Zn(NH3)2]2+(aq) H2(g) + 2 MnO2(s) Mn2O3(s) + H2O(l) Zn(s) + 2NH4 +(aq) + 2 MnO2(s) [Zn(NH3)2]2+(aq) + Mn2O3(s) + H2O(l) WET CELL BATTERY: There are huge chemical process is involved in Lead Acid battery’s charging and discharging condition. The diluted sulfuric acid H2SO4 molecules break into two parts when the acid dissolves. It will create positive ions 2H+ and negative ions SO4-. As we told before, two electrodes are connected as plates, Anode and Cathode. Anode catches the negative ions and cathode attracts the positive ions. This bonding in Anode and SO4- and Cathode with 2H+ interchange electrons and which is further react with the H2O or with the water (Diluted sulfuric acid, Sulfuric Acid + Water). The battery has two states of chemical reaction, Charging and Discharging. Discharging of a lead acid battery is again involved with chemical reactions. The sulfuric acid is in the diluted form with typically 3:1 ratio with water and sulfuric acid. When the loads are connected across the plates, the sulfuric acid again breaks into positive ions 2H+ and negative ions SO4. The hydrogen ions react with the PbO2 and make PbO and water H2O. PbO start reacting with the H2SO4 and creates PbSO4 and H2O. On the other side SO4- ions exchange electrons from Pb, creating radical SO4 which further creates PbSO4 reacting with the Pb. As explained above, following chemical reactions takes place at Anode and Cathode during the discharging process. These reactions are exactly opposite of charging reactions: At cathode Pb + SO4 2- => PbSO4 + 2e- At anode: PbO2 + SO4 2- + 4H- + 2e- => PbSO4 + 2H2O Combining above two equation, the overall chemical reaction will be PbO2 + Pb + 2H2SO4 => 2PbSO4 + 2H2O Charging Reactions: When the battery is connected with the charger, the sulfuric acid molecules break into two ions, positive ions 2H+ and negative ions SO4-. The hydrogen exchange electrons with the cathode and become hydrogen, this hydrogen reacts with the PbSO4 in cathode and form Sulfuric Acid (H2SO4) and Lead (Pb). On the other hand, SO4- exchange electrons with anode and become radical SO4. This SO4 reacts with PbSO4 of anode and create the lead peroxide PbO2 and sulfuric acid (H2SO4). The energy gets stored by increasing the gravity of sulfuric acid and increasing the cell potential voltage. As explained above, following chemical reactions takes place at Anode and Cathode during the charging process. At cathode PbSO4 + 2e- => Pb + SO4 2- At anode PbSO4 + 2H2O => PbO2 + SO4 2- + 4H- + 2e- Combining above two equation, the overall chemical reaction will be 2PbSO4 + 2H2O => PbO2 + Pb + 2H2SO4 Lead-acid battery maintenance rules 1. Watering is the most neglected maintenance feature of flooded lead-acid batteries. As overcharging decreases water, we need to check it frequently. Less water creates oxidation in plates and decreases the lifespan of the battery. Add distilled or ionized water when needed. 2. Check for the vents, they need to be perfected with rubber caps, often the rubber caps sticks with the holes too tightly. 3. Recharge lead-acid batteries after each use. A long period without recharging provides sulfating in the plates. 4. Do not freeze the battery or charge it more than 49-degree centigrade. In cold ambient batteries need to be fully charged as fully charge batteries safer than the empty batteries in respect of freezing. 5. Do not deep discharge the battery less than 1.7V per cell. 6. To store a lead acid battery, it needs to be completely charged then the electrolyte needs to be drained. Then the battery will become dry and can be stored for a long time period. FUEL CELL: Hydrogen + Oxygen = Electricity + Water Vapor Cathode: O2 + 4H+ + 4e– → 2H2O Anode: 2H2 → 4H+ + 4e– Overall: 2H2 + O2 → 2H2O A fuel cell is a device that converts chemical potential energy (energy stored in molecular bonds) into electrical energy. A PEM (Proton Exchange Membrane) cell uses hydrogen gas (H2) and oxygen gas (O2) as fuel. The products of the reaction in the cell are water, electricity, and heat. This is a big improvement over internal combustion engines, coal burning power plants, and nuclear power plants, all of which produce harmful by-products. Since O2 is readily available in the atmosphere, we only need to supply the fuel cell with H2 which can come from an electrolysis process (see Alkaline electrolysis or PEM electrolysis). There are four basic elements of a PEM Fuel Cell: The anode, the negative post of the fuel cell, has several jobs. It conducts the electrons that are freed from the hydrogen molecules so that they can be used in an external circuit. It has channels etched into it that disperse the hydrogen gas equally over the surface of the catalyst. The cathode, the positive post of the fuel cell, has channels etched into it that distribute the oxygen to the surface of the catalyst. It also conducts the electrons back from the external circuit to the catalyst, where they can recombine with the hydrogen ions and oxygen to form water. As the name implies, the heart of the cell is the proton exchange membrane. It allows protons to pass through it virtually unimpeded, while electrons are blocked. So, when the H 2 hits the catalyst and splits into protons and electrons (remember, a proton is the same as an H+ ion) the protons go directly through to the cathode side, while the electrons are forced to travel through an external circuit. Along the way they perform useful work, like lighting a bulb or driving a motor, before combining with the protons and O 2 on the other side to produce water. WORKING: Pressurized hydrogen gas (H2) entering the fuel cell on the anode side. This gas i s forced through the catalyst by the pressure. When an H2 molecule comes in contact with the platinum on the catalyst, it splits into two H+ ions and two electrons (e-). The electrons are conducted through the anode, where they make their way through the external circuit (doing useful work such as turning a motor) and return to the cathode side of the fuel cell. Meanwhile, on the cathode side of the fuel cell, oxygen gas (O2) is being forced through the catalyst, where it forms two oxygen atoms. Each of these atoms has a strong negative charge. This negative charge attracts the two H+ ions through the membrane, where they combine with an oxygen atom and two of the electrons from the external circuit to form a water molecule (H2O). Due to the high energetic content of hydrogen and high efficiency of fuel cells (55%), this great technology can be used in many applications like transport (cars, buses, forklifts, etc) and backup power to produce electricity during a failure of the electricity grid. Advantages of the technology: • By converting chemical potential energy directly into electrical energy, fuel cells avoid the “thermal bottleneck” (a consequence of the 2nd law of thermodynamics) and are thus inherently more efficient than combus • By converting chemical potential energy directly into electrical energy, fuel cells avoid the “thermal bottleneck” (a consequence of the 2nd law of thermodynamics) and are thus inherently more efficient than combustion engines, which must first convert chemical potential energy into heat, and then mechanical work. • Direct emissions from a fuel cell vehicle are just water and a little heat. This is a huge improvement over the internal combustion engine’s litany of greenhouse gases. • Fuel cells have no moving parts. They are thus much more reliable than traditional engines. • Hydrogen can be produced in an environmentally friendly manner, while oil extraction and refining is very damaging. Module – 5: NANOMATERIALS AND NANOCHEMISTRY It deals with the chemical application of nano materials along with their synthesis and characterization. Nano materials are mostly in the range of 10-9 m . Ex) Head of a pin--- 106 nm. Effect of size on material properties : Property changes at nano scale wrt phisio-chemical, optical ,electrical and magnetic behavior. 1) Au nps change their colour by changing their size. 5 nm- red, 60nm -pink, 90 nm- violet. 2) A drop of water (5 nm ) boils at 95.90c compared to normal water. 3) Adhesive property increases by decreasing the size as surface area increases. 4) Anti bacterial property increases as size decreases. 5) Optical properties of nps are dependent on size. All these changes in nps compared to the bulk materials are due to a large s/v ratio which is given by, S/V = 4∏r2/ 4/3∏r3 =3/r Materials with high s/v value possess very small diameter, porous and react with a much faster rate. Extra chemical reactivity is due to this high S/ V ratio. Synthesis of nano materials : Two common methods followed are 1) Top- down and 2) Bottom –up approach. Top-down Approach : It is a solid-state process involving size reduction from bulk materials. It mostly follows physical processes like crushing and grinding, milling. Limitations : A slow process but not suitable for large scale applications/ leads to various defects and imperfections on the surface/ particles of uniform size and morphology not formed/ Some well known processes are electro-explosion, scattering, laser absorption Bottom-up Approach.: It is purely a build-up one in which atom-by atom, molecule-molecule or cluster-cluster combination is made. Some of these are : sol -gel, chemical reduction, combustion, chemical vapor deposition, microwave synthesis etc. It also includes Green route which takes the help of sources like plants, yeast, fungi, bacteria etc. Advantages: Generates particles of uniform size, shape, morphology./ particles of excellent quality and quantity/ an environmental friendly process Advantages of plant extract: Produces much less toxic waste/ act as both reducing and capping agent/ a safe process/ nps obtained have excellent medicinal properties. Preparation of NPS : The three raw materials needed are given below. 1) Precursor salt ; AgNO3, AuCl3, ZnSO4,CuSO4 etc. 2) Reducing Agent : citric acid, H2O2, Hydrazine. These are mostly phyto chemicals, plant metabolic, polyphenols. 3) Stabilizing agents : Also known as capping agents these are mostly polymers like PVA, PVP, surfactants. The reducing agent provides electrons where as the capping agent makes the mixing process complete and faster. Synthesis and characterization of gold nps : IMP) It is an environment friendly, low-cost and effective process. The phyto chemicals ( Alkaloids, flavonoids) present in plant extract can act both as capping and reducing agent. Synthesis: It is a bio reduction process in which leaves of Papaya and Tulasi are cut into small pieces. 10 gm of such leaves taken in a beaker with 200ml of distilled water was boiled for 30 minutes. Then it was cooled and filtered through 0.45mm membrane filter. Then the precursor salt is prepared by taking 20 mg of Gold(iii) chloride in 5 ml of distilled water. For the preparation of gold nps, 20 ml of plant extract was taken in a beaker and placed in a hot magnetic stirrer at 400c. Then 1 ml of gold salt was added to it drop wise. The solution turned pink indicating gold nps. Au3+ + 3e- → Au0 Characterisation: UV-Visible Analysis : The absorption spectrum shows formation of Au as it shows a surface Plasmon resonance (SPR ) band at550nm. Plasmons are sub particles arising out of quantization of plasma oscillations. SPR results from the resonant oscillation of free electrons at the interface between positive and negative permittivity mutually stimulated by light. It is otherwise a manifestation of a coherent oscillation of conduction band electrons. X-ray diffraction study : XRD pattern shows the production of Au nps by the reduction of Au3+ to Au . It identifies the crystallographic nature of nps. The peak (111) at 2ѳ= 38o shows nps with fcc structure. Calculating the crystalline size ( d) using Debye -Scheres equation, d =0.94λ /βcos ѳ ≈ 15nm = K λ /βcos ѳ ,K≈ 1, ѳ = Bragg angle or diffraction angle Synthesis, characterization and application of Ag nps : 1) Preparation of plant extract : 20 gm of finely divided NEEM leaves were boiled with100 ml of double distilled water for 30 minutes. It was then filtered using a 0.45mm membrane filter to get the extract. 2) Preparation of AgNO3 solution: Suitable amount of AgNO3 salt was added to double distilled water to prepare 10 ml of the solution after boiling. 3)Synthesis of Ag np ; 5 ml of extract was taken inside a 50 ml beaker and placed in a magnetic stirrer. Then 1 ml of above salt solution was added to it drop wise using a micropipette. The colour suddenly changed to yellowish brown indicating formation of nps. Ag+ + e- ----→ Ag Characterisation : The sample was characterized using uv-vis spectroscopy and x-ray diffraction study. UV-VIS study : The absorption maxima found at 400nm indicates formation of AgNO 3 nps. XRD STUDY: It provides information about the crystalline nature and size of nps. The peak at 2ѳ =380 corresponds to(111) plane of nps and reveals fcc structure of silver nps. The size of nps can be calculated by Debye-Scherer equation, d = 0.94λ/β cos ɵ ≈13nm ( β = 0.001 - 0.02) Application: Food packaging, cosmetic industry, bio-sensors, catalysis, coating materials, textile industry. DISCLAIMER: The courseware material prepared may contain some text, figures and diagrams taken from google images and other readily available web sources. The contents are prepared for the use of students in Silicon Institute of Technology as additional reference material, and not for any commercial purpose.
FOREWORD This is the second iteration of preparing our own courseware material, after successful completion of a similar task undertaken a few years ago. These contents have been carefully prepared and should serve as excellent auxiliary material for both instructors and students. The Special Academic Group, Autonomy (SAGA) was formed for the sole purpose of preparing courseware contents primarily in the first-year theory subjects; a few second-year subjects were also included. The subjects for the first year were - Basic Electrical Engineering, Basic Electronics Engineering, Computer Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms, Engineering Mathematics I and II, Engineering Physics, Engineering Chemistry, Constitution of India, Environmental Science and Engineering and Communicative and Technical English. For the second year, the subjects for which courseware material was prepared were Analog Electronic Circuits, Digital Systems Design, Circuit Theory and Measurements and Instruments. Faculty members from all the departments contributed to the task. They were, in no particular order, Nalini Singh, Bimal Meher, Saumyaranjan Dash, Mukti Routray, Susmita Biswal, Manasa Dash, Bipin Tripathy, Sibasankar Nayak, Janmejay Senapati, Subrat Sahu, Pradeep Moharana, Rupambika Pattanaik, Dhananjay Tripathy, Jagadish Patra, Sachin Das, Deepak Ranjan Nayak, Amulya Roul, Bodhisattva Dash, Sanghamitra Das, Gyana Ranjan Biswal, Nibedita Swain and Rajan Mishra. The entire group worked diligently to successfully complete the task which included a peer review of the material. I take this opportunity to thank all the members of the SAGA group for a job well done. I sincerely hope that this courseware material comes in handy and is utilized to the fullest extent. These are readily available additional resources prepared in accordance with the Silicon autonomy syllabus, to complement textbooks and classroom lectures. If there are any errors, I would be grateful if they are brought to my notice so that we can correct them in subsequent versions. Dr. Jaideep Talukdar, Principal Silicon Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar December 2020 Module – 1: ECOLOGY & BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLES Historically, Rachel Carson’s 1962 book “Silent Spring” started wide -scale awareness in the 60s about the environment; she battled some large chemical corporations and created public knowledge and understanding of the fragility of ecosystems, and the environment in general. Origin The word “Environment” has come from an old french word environ or environner to be exact which literally means “to encircle” or “to surround”. Definition The word “environment” can be defined as “our life support system which includes air, water, land/soil & all other natural resources present around us”. According to ISO:14001 (International Organization for Standardization), environment can be defined as, “Surroundings in which an organization operates, including air, water, land, natural resources, flora(plants), fauna(animals), human beings and interrelations”. Related Terms 1. Environmental Science 2. Environmental Engineering 3. Environmental Management 4. Environmental Laws 1.Environmental Science It is the study of human beings’ impact on the environment and the physical, chemical and biological changes occurring in nature which focuses on pollution. It is highly interdisciplinary & it collects information from various fields such as biology, chemistry, geography, agriculture, geology etc. 2. Environmental Engineering It is defined as that branch of engineering whi ch is concerned with protecting the environment from the potentially deleterious or harmful effects of human activities, protecting the human population from the effects of environmental pollution and improving the environmental quality for better human health & well-being. 3. Environmental Management It consists of auditing of EIA (Environmental Impact Assessment), Planning, Preparing EIS (Environmental Impact Statement) & pollution management. 4. Environmental Laws It involves the body of statuaries, policies those are made in order to protect the nature from being misused by human beings. Some laws are regulative or controlling in nature while some are for preventive measure & some are binding on us. Building Blocks of Environmental Engineering Sustainable Development (SD) It can be defined as “the ability to meet the needs of present generation without compromising the ability of future generation to meet their needs” i.e. the balance or proper use of resources, so that our future generation will not face any problem for their survival, after taking care of our own survival needs. Pillars or Components of SD There are three pillars or components of Sustainable Development (SD) i.e. a) Economical Development b) Society or community Development c) Environmental Protection Human Dimension in Env. Engg. It is also known as Three factor model for assessing environmental degradation. To estimate or assess the extent of environmental degradation John Holdern (a physicist) and Paul Ehrlich (a biologist) has given a three factor model. According to this model, total environmental Impact (I) of degradation and pollution due to population in a given area depends on three factors i.e. P, A, T. P represents Size of population A represents Affluence or Per capita Consumption or per person consumption T represents Technology used. The relationship is, I = PAT In the developing countries, P3 syndrome i.e. (Population, Pollution, Poverty) and in the rich developed countries overuse of natural resources are the key or important factors leading to environmental degradation. Environmental Problems The major environmental problems that we are facing are – a) Water Pollution b) Air Pollution c) Biodiversity Depletion d) Large amount of Waste Production e) Food Supply Problems Causes of Environmental Problems Many Environmental Problems presently we are facing are mainly due to – a) Over Population b) Wasteful use of Resources c) Destruction & Degradation of Wildlife Habitats d) Depletion & Contamination of Surface Water & Ground Water e) Depletion of Non-Renewable resources or minerals f) Deforestation g) Soil Erosion h) Loss of Biodiversity Definition of Pollution It is an undesirable change in physical, chemical or biological characteristics of air, water & soil, that may harmfully affect human beings, animals, the plant life, industrial progress, living conditions & cultural assets. Definition of Pollutant It is an undesirable harmful solid, liquid or gaseous substance present in such a concentration in the environment which tends to be injurious for the whole living organisms. Ecological Concepts The word ecology was coined by Ernst Haeckel from two Greek words, Oikos & Logos. Oikos means House or Living Space & Logos means Study. Ecology is the branch of Biology concerned with the relations of various species to one another & to their physical surroundings Ecological Perspective Ecological perspective demands a greater understanding of the functioning of living systems & their interactions with the environment. It gives a qualitative emphasis on ecological concepts. Principles of ecology • Living organisms can’t exist with total disregard to their environment. • All living organisms & their physical environment are interdependent upon each other & also affect each other. • Every living organism has certain limits of tolerance towards the various factors of environment & only within these limits the organisms can survive. • The existence of life depends upon flow of energy through food chains & the cycling of nutrients. Aspects of ecology The two important aspects of ecology are – a) Autecology or species ecology b) Synecology or community ecology a) Autecology It is concerned with the ecology of an individual species & it’s population. b) Synecology It is the study of communities, their composition, their behaviour & the relation to the environment. Synecology is further subdivided into three categories – i) ii) iii) i) ii) iii) Population Ecology Genetic Ecology Taxonomic Ecology Population Ecology It relates with individual organisms with different groups of organisms within the ecosystem of different levels & the interrelationship among themselves. Genetic Ecology It is also known as Gene Ecology. Different organisms have different genes and chromosomes; hence they live in different places. The relationship due to the variation in genes among biotic components with their surroundings non-biotic environment is known as Genetic Ecology. Taxonomic Ecology It includes ecology of taxonomic groups such as microbes, vertebrates (with backbone), invertebrates (without backbone) & insects etc. Ecosystem An ecosystem is defined as a natural functional ecological unit comprising of living organisms (i.e. biotic community) & their non-living (i.e. abiotic) environment that interact to form a stable self-supporting system. Example: Pond ecosystem, Forest ecosystem etc. The ecosystems are characterized by a diversity of species, but in an ecosystem there must be representatives from the three functional or metabolic groups such as Primary Producers, Consumers & Decomposers. The ecosystems can vary in sizes. Properties of Ecosystem • An Ecosystem exists independent of specific components i.e. an individual tree may die, but a forest persist. • The components of an ecosystem are interdependent. • The nature of ecosystem depends on the species biodiversity of the ecosystem. • The function of ecosystem depends on the energy flow & cycling of chemical elements within the ecosystems. • The ecosystem can be disturbed by human activities & the most adverse effect of disturbance is the loss of biodiversity. Types of Ecosystem 1. Natural Ecosystem 2. Artificial or Man-made or Man-engineered Ecosystem 1.Natural Ecosystem These ecosystems operate by themselves under natural conditions. Depending on the type of habitats, these are further sub-divided into – I) Terrestrial Ecosystem II) Aquatic Ecosystem I) Terrestrial Ecosystem It includes forest, grassland, desert ecosystems. II) Aquatic Ecosystem These ecosystems found in the aquatic environment. It can be divided into two categories – a) Fresh water ecosystem b) Marine water ecosystem a) Fresh water ecosystem The Fresh water ecosystem can be i) Lotic & ii) Lentic Lotic means (moving or running water) e.g. River or Stream ecosystem Lentic means (Still or Standing water) e.g. Pond, Lake ecosystem b) Marine water ecosystem These include salt water bodies which may be Ocean ecosystem, Sea ecosystem. 2.Artificial ecosystem These are maintained artificially by human beings. e.g. garden, park. Structure or components of ecosystem Ecosystem has two major components. 1. Abiotic & 2. Biotic 1. Abiotic can be classified into hydrosphere, atmosphere & lithosphere 2. Biotic can be classified into producer, consumer & decomposer. Consumer can be primary, secondary, tertiary consumers. Functions of ecosystem Energy flow: It regulates the flow of energy from one level to the other. Nutrient cycling: It regulates cycling of nutrients. Environmental gradients: The ecosystem fix the limit of tolerance for each organism towards various factors of environment. Food Chain & Food Web: The energy produced by green plants are passed to next levels by a chain of consumers leading to formation of food chain & interlinking of food chain will lead to formation of food web. Biodiversity: The ecosystem regulates the species diversity to acquire a stable system. Natural Resources The materials those occur in the environment or those are created by the environment & useful for supporting life or promoting the well -being of human beings are termed as natural resources Natural Resources are the naturally occurring substances those are considered valuable in their natural form & their value rest in the amount of material available & the demand for it. Types of Natural Resources There are three types of natural resources – 1) Renewable or Inexhaustible i.e. available in unlimited quantity. Ex – Solar energy, wind power etc. 2) Non-renewable or exhaustible i.e. available in limited quantity Ex – coal, petrol, diesel etc. 3) Abstract Natural Resources It includes animals, plants & natural landscapes as part of countryside used for recreation & tourism activities. Ex – Bird watching, sight-seeing Value of environment The value of the environment is considered on the basis of the economic status of the particular region. Natural resources existing in the region are the backbone on the economic status. The following four points will help in evaluating the environment – 1. Environmental Auditing 2. Biodiversity 3. Cost-Benefit Analysis 4. Environmental Ethics 1. Environmental Auditing Environmental Audit is defined as a systematic listing of natural resources in an area playing a key role for economic status & sustainable developments of mankind in that area following definite management & regulatory systems. Generally, it provides a list of all the resources present in the area. The audit activities are carried out in three phases – a) Pre-audit activities b) On-site audit activities c) Off-site or Post audit activities 1(a) Pre-audit activities It includes planning, scheduling the audit activities & selecting the audit team. 1(b) Onsite audit activities It includes interviewing of the site personnel & Inspecting the site. 1(c) Post audit activities It includes – • Preparing & distributing audit reports • Determining potential solutions • Assigning responsibilities • Implementing actions & • Conducting follow-up of the action plan. 2.Biodiversity It doesn’t imply just a collection of species, but is a basic resource which acts as a human life support system. Biodiversity plays an important role in biogeochemical cycles. Biodiversity has three hierarchical levels i.e. i) Genetic Biodiversity ii) Species Biodiversity iii) Ecosystem Biodiversity There can be three kinds of losses of biological resources. i) Depletion of a once common species ii) Local or global extinction iii) Ecosystem disruption. 3. Cost-Benefit Analysis Working principles for Cost-Benefit Analysis include – i) The SMS approach SMS stands for Safe Minimum Standard ii) The Minimax rule Minimax stands for minimizing maximum losses i) The SMS approach It attempts to provide a decision-making process for problems involving long period of time & large uncertainties. This approach makes conservation the preferred option. ii) The Minimax rule It is a necessarily pessimistic decision rule biased towards conservation. 4. Environmental Ethics It gives the attitude of people towards other living beings & the natural environment. We, human beings must eradicate our feelings of superiority over the rest of natural world & develop an “I-Thou” relationship rather than “I-It” relationship with the environment. Levels of organization in Biotic Components There are six major levels of ecological organization are recognized in the biotic components of the environment. 1) Individual 2) Population 3) Community 4) Ecosystem 5) Biomes & 6) Biosphere 1) Individual These are single species. Individuals have physiological functions & respond to environmental conditions 2) Population Population consists of a group of individuals of the same species living in a particular area at the same time. Birth rate, death rate plays an important role in the size of population. 3) Community Population of different species living together interact with each other to form a community. Niche A suitable or comfortable position in the ecological hierarchy for a species. Ex- Phytoplankton → Zooplankton→ Fish → Whale Niche of fish in the above ecological hierarchy is three or 3rd position. 4) Ecosystem It includes both biotic & abiotic components of an area. The major or important feature of this ecological level is the strong interaction between the various biotic & abiotic components present. Nutrient cycling & energy flow occur in this ecological level 5) Biomes When environmental conditions are similar in different parts of the country or around the globe, the habitats & communities are also often similar, giving rise to a higher level of biotic organization known as biomes. Ex- a) Tropical Rainforest (High temp.& High rainfall) b) Desert Scrub (High temp. & low rainfall) 6) Biosphere The highest organizational level is the biosphere & it extends from bottom of the sea to the top of the sky where life exists. Biogeochemical cycles occur at this ecological level. Ecosystem Process: In the ecosystem process, the following processes are essential for the survival & maintenance of biotic components. 1. Energy flow & 2. Nutrient cycling 1. Energy flow On the earth, the ultimate source of energy for life is solar radiation. There are two sources of energy – a) Autotrophic b) Heterotrophic 1.(a) Autotrophic Autotrophic production of energy is carried out within the ecosystem by green plants in the presence of sunlight using photosynthesis process. 1.(b) Heterotrophic Heterotrophic energy source is the one, where the chemical energy is imported as organic matter which is originated from primary production in some other ecosystem. This imported organic matter is called allochthonous. Photosynthesis 12H2O + 6CO2 + 709kcal (from sunlight)→ C6H12O6(Carbohydrate)+ 6O2 + 6H2O Out of total amount of solar radiation available, only 1 to 5% is used in the photosynthesis process. The organic matter produced by green plants in the Photosynthesis process is called Primary Production or (PP). PP is affected by various environmental factors like water, light, temperature & soil nutrients. PP is of 2 types. 1) GPP (Gross Primary Production) 2) NPP (Net Primary Production) GPP – R(Respiration) = NPP GPP is the total amount of chemical energy or biomass stored by plants per unit area per unit time. Since plant requires energy for synthesis of organic matter & functioning of plant itself, some of GPP is used in the process of respiration. NPP is used for plant growth & reproduction. NPP is normally 80 to 90% of GPP. As various environmental factors affect PP, hence GPP & NPP vary over the globe. NPP can be classified into four broad groups each with a characteristic productivity range. 1. Low range – 0 to 250 gm/m2 – year Ex- Desert, semi-desert 2. Middle range – 250 to 1000 gm/m2 – year Ex- Non-forest communities like shrubland, grassland 3. Normal range – 1000 to 2000 gm/m2 – year Ex- Forest 4. High range – 2000 to 3000 gm/m2 – year Ex- Rainforest Respiration When any organism requires energy, the reverse chemical reaction of photosynthesis occurs, known as respiration, where the glucose molecule is broken down in the presence of oxygen to produce CO2, H2O & energy for work done & maintenance. The reaction is – C6H12O6+6O2→ 6CO2+6H20+ energy for work done & maintenance 2. Nutrient cycling During decomposition, the complex organic molecules in the original detritus or waste are gradually broken down to much simpler constituents & inorganic molecules like nitrates & phosphates, as the material moves through the decomposer or detritus food chain. These are then, enter into the soil or sediment or dissolved in water, where they become the nutrients available for reuse by green plants. This whole process of recycling of nutrients within the ecosystem is known as nutrient cycling. Overview of 2 major ecosystem process of energy flow, nutrient cycling Food Chain Chemical energy produced by primary producers & the nutrients used by plants to build plant tissues, are passed up by a chain of consumers leading to formation of food chain, where each link in the chain is provided with energy & nutrients. Depending on the types of foods, there are three types of food chain available. a) Predator or Grazing Food Chain b) Saprophytic or Detritus Food Chain c) Parasitic Food Chain a) Predator or Grazing Food Chain Predator means an animal that naturally preys on others. Ex:- Sunlight→Grass→Grasshopper→Frog→Snake→ Hawk b) Saprophytic or Detritus Food Chain It starts from DOM (Dead Organic Matter) & goes to detritus feeding organisms i.e. detrivores i.e. bacteria, worms etc. & on to their predators. Ex:- Dead leaves→Soil mites→Insects→Lizard c) Parasitic Food Chain It is a food chain in which parasites live on the host body or within the host body to get energy. This food chain also starts from the green plants & animals to parasitic microbes. Food Web In most ecosystems, food chains interlink with each other to produce food web. Food web shows the food pattern of energy flow in the ecosystem. Tropic Level Tropic level or nutritional level or tier gives the feeding status of an organism in an ecosystem. It is based on the concept who feeds on whom. It can be - i)First tropic level or primary producer level Ex: - Green plants ii)Second tropic level or primary consumer level Ex: - Herbivores iii)Third tropic level or secondary consumer level Ex: - Carnivores Ecological pyramid The graphical representation of tropic levels is called the ecological pyramid. The arrangement of organisms in a food chain according to tropic levels forms a pyramid. Generally, pyramids are of three types. 1. Pyramid of energy 2. Pyramid of biomass 3. Pyramid of numbers. 1. Pyramid of energy Generally, 10% energy is transferred between adjacent tropic levels & rest 90% of energy is used up in that tropic level giving rise to energy pyramid. This is called 10% rule of ecosystem. It is based on rate of energy flow & productivity at each successive tropic level. It decreases from autotrophs to higher tropic level. 2. Pyramid of biomass It shows the total mass of the organisms in each tropic level. It is based on total dry weight present in the level. It decreases from autotrophs to higher tropic level. 3. Pyramid of Numbers It shows the number of organisms in each tropic level. There may be gradual decrease or increase in the number of individuals. Standing Crop The amount of living materials in different tropic level or in any component population is known as standing crop. It can be expressed as number/unit area or as biomass. Ecological Succession In an ecosystem, new species may succeed older species. The process of gradual change in the conditions of physical environment, leading to the change in the species structure of an ecological community (i.e. replacement of one species by the other) over space & time, is called Ecological Succession or Ecological Development. Biogeochemical Cycles • Bio means living beings • Geo means earth extended to air & water, where life exists. • Chemical means chemical elements which continuously move in the cycles. • The cyclic pathways through which chemical elements move from environment to the organisms & back to the environment are called bio-geochemical cycles. • All parts or components of different ecological systems, on a local or global scale are linked with the Biogeochemical Cycles. • Biogeochemical Cycles can have a number of phases & reservoirs. 1) Organic Phase 2) Inorganic Phase 1) Organic Phase In this phase, nutrients pass rapidly through biotic communities using food chain. 2) Inorganic Phase It contains all nutrient elements & are external to food chain. The various sub-phases of the inorganic phase are – a) Sedimentary Phase b) Atmospheric Phase c) Aquatic Phase or Aquatic Reservoir a) Sedimentary Phase It involves interactions with the solid earth or rocks & results of geological activities such as weathering. b) Atmospheric Phase It forms major part of some cycles like ‘N’ cycle & ‘C’ cycle & minor parts of some cycles like ‘P’ Cycle. c) Aquatic Phase or Aquatic Reservoir It involves plant nutrients. Types of biogeochemical cycles There are two types of biogeochemical cycles. I) Air or Atmospheric Cycle. II) Water or Hydrological Cycle I) Air or Atmospheric Cycle It can be classified into – i) C – Carbon ii) N – Nitrogen iii) O – Oxygen iv) P – Phosphorous v)S – Sulphur i) Carbon Cycle The carbon cycle is nature's way of reusing carbon atoms, which travel from the atmosphere into organisms in the earth and then back into the atmosphere over and over again. Most carbon is stored in rocks and sediments, while the rest is stored in the ocean, atmosphere, and living organisms. ii) Nitrogen Cycle Nitrogen Cycle is a biogeochemical process through which nitrogen is converted into many forms, consecutively passing from the atmosphere to the soil to organism and back into the atmosphere. It involves several processes such as nitrogen fixation, nitrification, denitrification, decay and putrefaction. iii) Oxygen Cycle The oxygen cycle is the cycle that helps move oxygen through the three main regions of the Earth, the Atmosphere, the Biosphere, and the Lithosphere. The Atmosphere is of course the region of gases that lies above the earth's surface and it is one of the largest reservoirs of free oxygen on earth. iv) Phosphorous Cycle Phosphorus moves in a cycle through rocks, water, soil and sediments and organisms. Over time, rain and weathering cause rocks to release phosphate ions and other minerals. This inorganic phosphate is then distributed in soils and water. Plants take up inorganic phosphate from the soil. v) Sulphur Cycle The sulphur cycle is the collection of processes by which sulphur moves between rocks, waterways and living systems. Such biogeochemical cycles are important in geology because they affect many minerals. II) Water or Hydrological Cycle The hydrological cycle of the earth is the sum total of all processes in which water moves from the land and ocean surface to the atmosphere and back in form of precipitation. The hydrological cycle is dependent on various factors and is equally affected by oceans and land surfaces. Interception:- It is the evaporation of water from the outer surface of leaves during & after rainfall. Transpiration:- It is the evaporation of water through foliage. Evapotranspiration:- It is the combination of Evaporation from water bodies & transpiration from leaves. Module – 2: WATER & WASTEWATER TREATMENT Physical Properties of Water The various physical properties of water that shows wide variation in magnitude includes – • Colour • Turbidity • Taste & odour • Temperature • Solids • Colour It is measured in Hazen’s Scale. The permissible limit of colour for drinking water is 5mg/L or ppm. • Turbidity It is the measure of cloudiness in water & caused by presence of suspended matter which scatters & absorbs light. It is measured in NTU (Nephelometric Turbidity Unit). The Permissible limit of turbidity for drinking water is 1NTU. • Taste & Odour This may be due to presence of micro-organisms, algae, dissolved minerals, salts etc. It is measured in TON (Threshold Odour Number). The permissible limit of TON for drinking water is 1 to 3. TON = (A + B)/ A A - Volume of Sample with odour B -Volume of Pure Water with no odour Added If A was a 100 ml sample and 100 ml of water had to be added to not detect the odour - the TON would be 2. TON = (100 + 100)/ 100=200/100=2. • Temperature The temperature of water varies with atmospheric temperature & it is a significant parameter regarding characteristics of water. For drinking water, the temperature should be 10-250C. • Solids Solids content of water represents the characteristics of water. Solids present in water can be studied as follows- a) Total Solids (TS) b) Suspended Solids (SS) c) Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) = TS – SS d) Total Volatile Solids (TVS) e) Volatile Suspended Solids (VSS) f) Filterable Solids (FS) & Non-Filterable Solids (NFS) NFS = SS (Particle Size Range is 100 to 10-3 mm) FS can be Colloidal (Particle Size Range is 10-3 to 10-6 mm) & Dissolved (Particle Size Range is 10-6 to 10-9 mm) Chemical Properties of Water It can be Inorganic & Organic Inorganic Chemical properties of water includes • PH • Alkalinity & Acidity • Hardness Conductivity Organic Chemical properties of water includes • BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) • COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand) • TOC (Total Organic Carbon) • TOD (Total Oxygen Demand) Inorganic Chemical properties of water • PH PH is Potential of Hydrogen or Power of Hydrogen PH = - log [H+] or = - log [H3O+] PH range for public water supplies is 6.5 to 8.5. Q. In a water treatment plant, the PH values of incoming & outgoing water are 7.2 & 8.4 respectively. Assuming a linear variation of PH with time, determine the average P H value of water. • Alkalinity & Acidity Alkalinity is also known as ANC or (Acid Neutralizing Capacity) & Acidity is also known as BNC or (Base Neutralizing Capacity) Alkalinity can be of three types. a) Carbonate Alkalinity b) Bicarbonate Alkalinity & c) Hydroxide Alkalinity • Hardness Hard water has high mineral content. Hardness of water are of two types. a) Temporary Hardness or Carbonate Hardness b) Permanent Hardness or Non-Carbonate Hardness a) Temporary Hardness It is due to carbonate & bicarbonate of Ca+2 & Mg+2. b) Permanent Hardness It is due to Chloride & Sulphate of Ca+2 & Mg+2. Hardness of water is expressed in mg/L as CaCO3. The permissible limit of hardness of drinking water is 200 mg/L as CaCO3. Hardness in mg/L as CaCO3 = [M+2(concentration in mg/L) X 50]/ [equivalent weight of M+2] = M+2(Concentration in meq/L) X 50 Q. Determine the various hardness of the following water sample. Concentration (in mg/L) Constituent Ca+2 60 Mg+2 29.3 - 366 HCO3 • Conductivity or Electrical Coductivity It is the measure of the ability of an aqueous solution to carry an electric current. The equation can be, ec= ƩCifi where, ec is electrical conductivity in μs(siemens)/cm, Ci is concentration of ionic species in solution in mg/L & fi is conductivity factor for ionic species. Organic Chemical properties of water • BOD5 = 0.6 COD • CBOD or Carbonaceous BOD = 0.92 COD Q. Determine COD & TOC for glucose(C6H12O6)? Q. If bacteria cells are represented by the chemical formula C 5H7O2N, then determine the potential carbonaceous BOD, when bacteria cell concentration is 1000mg/L. Q. A wastewater is analysed & is shown to contain 100 mg/L of ethylene glycol (C 2H6O2) & 120 mg/L of phenol(C6H6O). Determine COD & TOC. Organic Content Parameter of Water When an organic waste is discharged to a stream, the organic content of the effluent or discharge undergoes a biochemical reaction with the help of micro-organisms. BOD = P(DOI-DOF) Where, P is Dilution Ratio, DOI & DOF are initial & final DO (Dissolved Oxygen) concentration Corrected BOD = P[(DOI-DOF)-f(BI-BF)] Where, f is the correction factor or seeding factor=1-(1/P), BI & BF are initial & final DO (Dissolved Oxygen) concentration of seeded diluted water or Blank Q. The results from a BOD test diluted by 100 are given below. Calculate the BODS. Time (in days) DO(in mg/L) 0 7.95 1 3.75 2 3.45 3 2.75 4 2.15 5 1.80 Q. The results from a BOD test diluted by 100 are given below. Calculate the Corrected BOD S. Time (in days) DO(in mg/L) Blank DO(in mg/L) 0 7.95 8.15 1 3.75 8.10 2 3.45 8.05 3 2.75 8.00 4 2.15 7.95 5 1.80 7.90 The rate of decomposition of organic matter is directly proportional to the amount of organic matter available & it is a first order reaction. i.e. d/dt(Lt)α Lt => d/dt(Lt) = -k1xLt => d(Lt)/Lt= k1xdt Where, Lt is BOD remaining in mg/L=BODr & K1 is deoxygenation rate coefficient Now taking integration of both sides and putting initial condition at t=0, Lt=L0, we will have final expression for BOD exerted at any time t i.e. BODt= L0(1-e-k t) 1 Q. If K1 or deoxygenation rate coefficient is 0.15 per day, then determine the ultimate BOD or BODu or L0. Temperature effect on K1 Temperature has an effect on K1 & is given by, KT = (K20)x(Ɵ)(T-20) Where, KT= The deoxygenation rate coefficient at T0C K20=The deoxygenation rate coefficient at 200C Ɵ = Coefficient= 1.047 for 200C< T < 300C & = 1.35 for 40C < T < 200C NBOD The Oxygen demand associated with the oxidation of ammonia (NH3) to nitrate (NO3 Nitrogenous BOD or NBOD. -) is called 2NH3 + 3O2→2NO2 - + 2H+ + 2H2O 2NO2 - + O2 → 2NO3 - So 2NH3 + 4O2 → 2NO3 - + 2H+ + 2H2O Finally, NH3 + 2O2 → NO3 - + H+ + H2O Q. Determine the TOD (Total Oxygen Demand) if the sample contains 25 mg/L of N. BOD remaining (BODr) graph BOD exerted (BODt) graph CBOD & NBOD relationship Q. 15ml of sample was diluted in 300ml bottle. Initial DO was 8.9 mg/L & final DO after 5days was 4.4mg/L. The corresponding initial & final DO of diluted water was 9.1mg/L & 9.05 mg/L. Find out 5 days BOD at 200C. Q. BOD of an sample incubated for one day at 300C was found to be 100mg/L. What would be the 5 day BOD at 200C. The deoxygenation rate coefficient (K1) is 0.12 at 200C. Q. Determine the two day BOD for a wastewater at 200C, while BOD5 at 200C is 250mg/L. The deoxygenation rate coefficient(K1) value at 200C is 0.2 per day. What shall be the BOD after the end of seven days at 250C . Q. A BOD test was conducted taking 5% wastewater mixed with 95% aerated water for dilution & the following observations were found out: i) DO of the aerated water used for dilution is 3.6 mg/L ii) DO of the original wastewater sample is 0.8 mg/L iii) DO of the diluted wastewater after incubation at 200C for 5 days is 0.7 mg/L Calculate the 5 days BOD of the above wastewater sample if the deoxygenation constant is 0.11. Aquatic Pollution The aquatic Pollution can be classified into three broad groups. a) Fresh water pollution or Surface water pollution b) Estuarine pollution c) Marine pollution a) Fresh water pollution The pollution of fresh water can be caused by:- • Wastes from municipality & industries • Oil from industry wastes & cleaning of vehicles • Thermal waste from industries & power stations • Heavy metals etc. b) Estuarine pollution Estuarine means tidal mouth of river or where river mixes with the sea. So if surface water is polluted then it can lead to pollution of estuarine. c) Marine pollution The main pollutants for Marine pollution are:- i) Manmade organic poisons like Pesticides & herbicides ii) Radioactivity due to radioactive substances. Point & Non-Point Sources of Pollution Point Sources are those, which discharge pollutants from specific locations such as chimney, drainpipe of factories etc. Point Sources are easier to monitor & regulate. Non-point sources of pollution are those, which don’t have any specific location of discharge. As a result, these are difficult to monitor & regulate. Ex:- Run-off from paddy fields, Lawns & Gardens. Oxygen Sag Curve The longitudinal profile of Oxygen concentration is Known as Oxygen sag curve. Eutrophication It can be defined as the enrichment of water by inorganic plant nutrients like N & P, which results in increase in primary productivity. Artificial eutrophication is known as cultural eutrophication which is caused by adding fertilizers. The problems arising due to Eutrophication are:- • Water quality may have unacceptable taste & odour • Water may be injurious to health • The household usefulness of water may decrease. Oxygen transfer in waterbodies The oxygen transfer in waterbodies is given by Orlob equation i.e. {(Cg-C0)/(Cg-Ct)} = ek 2t Where, Cg = Saturation Concentration of oxygen C0 = Initial Concentration of oxygen Ct = Concentration of oxygen after time ‘t’ K2 = reaeration rate constant Q. If saturation concentration of oxygen in water is 9.2mg/L & the initial concentration of oxygen is 2.1mg/L, then determine the time it takes to become 7.5mg/L, having K 2 value 0.25 per day. What is the time required for Ct to be 5,6,7,8,9 mg/L. Ground water Quality/Contamination The simplest model of decay of a contaminant is to assume the decay to be a first order reaction i.e. r = - kc & Ct = C0e-Kt Where, Ct = Concentration at time ‘t’ in mg/L C0 = Initial Concentration in mg/L t = time in days K = first order decay coefficient Q. Determine the concentration of a contaminant at the downstream well, if the upstream concentration is 80mg/L. Assume decay constant (k) to be 10-4 per day & time (t) = 274 years Ground Water Recharge It is also known as deep percolation. It is a hydrologic process, where water moves downward from surface to ground. Recharge can occur both naturally & artificially. • Natural way of recharge is occurred through hydrological cycle. • Recharge occurs artificially, when rainwater, reclaimed water or recycled water is injected or routed to the subsurface. Recharge can help move excess salts that accumulate in the root zone to deeper soil layers or into the deep groundwater system. Ground Water Flow The ground water flow is governed by Darcy’s law which can be expressed as follows:- Q = KiA = KA(dh/dL) = KA{(h2-h1)/(L2-L1)} Where, Q = horizontal flow in m3/sec K = hydraulic conductivity in m/sec i = dh/dL= hydraulic gradient A = cross sectional area in square mtr h2- h1= water head drop L2-L1 = Length difference over which water head drop occurs q = Q/A = Specific discharge or discharge per unit area Q. Determine the daily flow capacity and transmissivity of an aquifer, if it’s height, width, length are 15mtr, 800mtr & 2km respectively. The water head change over the length 2km is 3mtr. The hydraulic conductivity (K) is 6x10-7 m/sec. Water Table A water table is the underground depth, at which point the ground is totally saturated by water. The water table may vary due to seasonal changes in precipitation, evapotranspiration & topography etc. Aquifer An aquifer is a body of saturated rock through which water can easily move. An aquifer is an underground layer of water bearing permeable rock from which ground water can b e extracted using a water well. Aquifer can be of two types- • a) Unconfined aquifer • b) Confined aquifer a) Unconfined aquifer An unconfined aquifer is the one which is open to receive water from the ground surface & whose water table surface is free to fluctuate up & down, depending on the recharge & discharge rate. These are extremely susceptible to contamination. b) Confined aquifer These types of aquifers have rock layer with less permeability or confining bed of rock above them due to which water can’t enter freely into these type of aquifers from the ground surface. These are less susceptible to contamination. Concept of Hydrology i) Water Balance or Water Budget ii) Hyetograph & Hydrograph iii)Rainfall-Runoff Relationship or Rational formula for determining runoff i)Water Balance or Water Budget It gives the quantitative account of hydrological cycle. The equation for water balance is based on conservation of mass. The water balance equation is P= R+E+∆S+∆G Where, P is Precipitation R is Runoff E is Evaporation ∆S is change in soil moisture status ∆G is change in ground water status ii) Hyetograph & Hydrograph Hyetograph represents rainfall intensity vs time. Hydrograph represents runoff or stream discharge vs time. If time is unit i.e. 1hr., then hydrograph will be unit hydrograph. iii)Rainfall-Runoff Relationship or Rational formula for determining runoff Q = CIA Where, Q is runoff in m3/sec C is locality coefficient I is Rainfall Intensity in mm/hr A is Catchment Area in square KM Peak Discharge (QP)or Peak Run-off It can be expressed as follows- QP = 0.278 CIA Modified Rational Formula given by Wallingford is- QP = 0.278CVCRIA Where, CV is volumetric runoff coefficient & CR is Routing Coefficient Water Treatment The objectives of water treatment are- A) To produce Water which is safe for human consumption B) To produce Water at a reasonable cost C) To reduce water impurities to acceptable levels Organoleptic Parameters Organoleptic Parameters are those parameters which can be sensed or felt by human organs. Ex:- Colour, Taste & Odour etc. Classes of Water treatment Descripition Class No Treatment A B Disinfection only C Standard water Treatment D Advanced/Special water Treatment Source Borehole water Borehole water River,Reservoir Industrial Water Monitoring Frequency The water quality parameters are required to be monitored depending on the s ource & quality of raw water. The three categories are- A) Minimum monitoring(C1) B) Current monitoring(C2) C) Periodic Monitoring(C3) Water Treatment Processes The treatment processes of water can be classified into three stages- A) Pretreatment processes B) Standard or Conventional processes C) Special or Advanced processes A) Pretreatment processes Some treatment processes are required prior to standard water treatment processes which may include- i) Screening ii) Storage iii) Aeration iv) Chemical pre-treatment i) Screening:- Different types of screens are used in this process. Those are can be - a) Coarse Screen b) Fine Screen c) Micro Screen a) Coarse Screen:- These screens contain typically inclined bars of 25mm dia & 100mm spacing, preventing large floating matters from entering the treatment plant b) Fine Screen:- If storage is not provided, then fine screens are fitted after the coarse screens. If there is storage, then fine screens are placed at the outlet of the storage tanks. Fine screens are typically mesh with openings about 6mm dia or square C) Micro Screen:- In micro screens, mesh openings range from 20 to 40 µm.These type of screens are used only for relatively uncontaminated water. ii) Storage:- Storage tanks balance the flows going to the treatment plant. Storage capacity should be equivalent to 7 to 10 days of the average water demand. The period of storage shouldn’t be long, so as not to encourage the growth of unwanted organisms iii) Aeration:- Aeration is the supply of oxygen from the atmosphere to water to effect beneficial changes in the quality of water. It is a common treatment process for groundwater Aeration is generally used for the followings- a) To release excess H2S gas which may cause undesirable taste & odour. b) To release excess CO2 which may have corrosive properties c) To increase oxygen content of water. iv) Chemical pre-treatment:- The chemical pre-treatment to remove undesirable properties of water like algae or excess colour is a more expensive process than chemical post-treatment. In pre-treatment, greater amount of chemicals are required to effect the same result as some of the chemicals are absorbed by turbidity of water. The two Chemical pre-treatment processes which are generally used are- a) Pre-Chlorination b) Activated Carbon a) Pre-chlorination:- It is used on low turbidity water with a high coliform count. The chlorine is injected into the water stream & it oxidizes & precipitates iron & manganese. It also kill pathogens & reduces colour. The chlorine dose used is 5mg/L. Pre-chlorination also reduces NH3 in both surface water & ground water supplies. b) Activated Carbon:- The activated Carbon is used for- i) Removal of Photosynthetic Algae ii) Improvement of colour & odour iii) Removal of organic compounds Activated Carbon can be used either as PAC (Powdered Activated Carbon) or as GAC (Granular Activated Carbon). Generally for water treatment PAC is used, but GAC is used where taste & odour of water have an industrial base. PAC has lower cost & efficiency than GAC. Doses may vary from 3 to 20 mg/L. B) Standard or Conventional processes It includes- i) Sedimentation ii) Coagulation iii) Flocculation iv) Filtration & V) Disinfection i) Sedimentation The heavier large particles settle down by the force of gravity at the bottom of the sedimentation tank, which is called Sedimentation. Stoke’s law for settling velocity is the deciding force for sedimentation. Stoke’s law can be represented by- VS=(g/18µ)(ρs- ρw)d2 Where, VS is settling velocity g is acceleration due to gravity µ is dynamic viscocity d is dia of settling particle ρs is density of particle settling ρw is density of water ii) Coagulation The lighter smaller particles don’t settle down by the force of gravity. To make them settle down, some amount of coagulants are added to the water, which is called Coagulation. Some examples of coagulants are- • Alum i.e. aluminium sulphate • Ferric Chloride • Ferric Sulphate • Ferrous Sulphate iii) Flocculation When coagulants are added to the water, the lighter smaller particles coagulate or combine with each other forming bigger particles, known as floc & the process is called flocculation. iv) Filtration It is the process of passing water through a porous medium, with the expectation that the filtrate water has better quality than the incoming water. Generally, two types of filters are used a)Rapid gravity filter:- Here rate of filtration is high i.e. 5 to 20m/hr. b) Slow sand filter:- Here rate of filtration is slow i.e. 0.1 to 0.2m/hr. V) Disinfection By disinfection, pathogens & micro-organisms are killed, thereby making water more pure. The requirements of a good disinfectant are- a) It should be toxic to micro-organisms. b) It should have a fast rate of kill. c) It should be persistent enough to prevent regrowth of organisms in the distribution system. d) It shouldn’t produce undesirable compounds. e) It should be safe to handle. f) It should be of reasonable cost. Chick’s law The rate of destruction of micro-organisms is often a first order chemical reaction as given by Chick’s law i.e. Where, Nt = Number of organisms at time ‘t’ N0 = Number of organisms at time ‘t’= 0 K = Rate constant depends on types of micro-organisms present & types of disinfectants used The various examples of disinfectants are- a) Chlorine dioxide b) Chlorination c) Chloramines d) UV radiation Chlorine demand & Breakpoint Chlorination When chlorine is added to water, the chlorine at first oxidizes inorganic compounds & some amount of chlorine will be consumed by organic matter present in water. Then some amount of chlorine will be used for formation & subsequent destruction of chloramines. The amount of chlorine required to fulfill the above consumption requirements are called chlorine demand. The point at which the chlorine demand is satisfied is called the breakpoint chlorination. ()0()()(),ttttkttddNNNkNdtdtSoNNe−=−= The excess dose of chlorine after breakpoint, is available for disinfection which appears as residual chlorine. A residual chlorine of minimum 0.5mg/L is maintained in disinfection practices. C) Special or Advanced processes The purposes of advanced water treatment processes are- i) To take water treated by standard water treatment processes & to improve it to an exceptionally high-quality water as often required by particular industries like food industry & pharmaceuticals etc. ii) To treat water containing specific chemical or microbiological contaminants, so that they can be brought to an acceptable standard. Wastewater Treatment Introduction Generation of wastewater is based on our water consumption rate, which is increasing & the way we use water. As undesirable contaminants are likely to be present in the wastewater, it can contaminate or degrade our surface water or ground water resources, hence it should be properly treated before releasing to the water bodies or environment. Types of wastewater a) Domestic/Sanitary wastewater b) Industrial wastewater c) Agricultural wastewater d) Storm/Runoff water Common Terms Sewage- It refers to domestic / sanitary wastewater. Sewer- It refers to pipes carrying sewage. Sewerage- It refers to sewer network systems. FOG- It refers to Fat, Oil & Grease, which are basically immiscible layer in the wastewater. Wastewater Treatment Processes a) Pre-treatment b) Primary treatment c) Secondary or Biological treatment a) Pre-treatment Pre-treatment of municipal wastewater is required to make it useful for further treatment & to decrease overall load on the system. It includes Screening, Grit Channels, Oil & Grease removal, Chemical pre-treatment etc. b) Primary treatment It basically removes suspended solids (SS) from the wastewater. Sometimes, it also removes some organic solids along with inorganic suspended solids. It includes sedimentation, coagulation etc. The removal efficiency w.r.t. SS is 50-70% and w.r.t. removal of BOD is 25- 40%. c) Secondary or Biological treatment It can be divided into two major categories, depending on the availability of oxygen. i) Aerobic Process i.e. it occurs in presence of oxygen & ii) Anaerobic Process i.e. it occurs in absence of oxygen. i) Aerobic Process Aerobic Processes like Trickling Filter, RBC (Rotating Biological Contactor) & ASP (Activated Sludge Process) etc. ii) Anaerobic Process Anaerobic process has three major steps like Hydrolysis, Acidogenesis or Fermentation & Methanogenesis. Aerobic vs Anaerobic Process • • In aerobic process, molecular oxygen present which is absent in case of anaerobic process. In aerobic process, stable oxidized end products like CO2 & H2O are generated, but in case of anaerobic process stable reduced end products like CH4 & NH3 are generated. • • • • In aerobic no byproduct recovery, but in anaerobic by product methane gas is useful. In aerobic appreciable microbial growth occurs, but in anaerobic no appreciable growth of microbes. In aerobic less skilled operation & in anaerobic more skilled/stringent operation is required. In aerobic low capital cost but high operating cost & in anaerobic high capital investment but low operating cost. • Aerobic process is suitable for low BOD wastewater like sewage while anaerobic process is suitable for high BOD wastewater/ sludge coming from sugar mills and other agrochemical operations. ASP (Activated Sludge Process) It is an excellent method of treating either raw sewage or more generally the settled sewage. The sewage discharged from the primary sedimentation tank, which is normally used in this process, is mixed with 20 to 30% of activated sludge, which contains a large concentration of highly active aerobic micro-organisms, which increases the rate of decomposition. • The ASP unit basically consists of CSTR (Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor), which is an aeration basin equipped with surface aerators and secondary clarifier unit. • The aerobic bacteria culture is developed in the reactor and remain i n suspension. Monod Model Monod Kinetics is used for microbial growth calculations and reactor sizing in the activated sludge process. The pertinent equations are rg = dX/dt =μ X= [μmax {S /(Ks + S)}]X , where the terms have the usual meanings. S, substrate Conc, X, microbe conc. The diagram below shows how Ks is determined from μmax . Monod's equation is an empirical equation to determine rg , the growth rate of microbes. Wastewater treatment flow diagram Reactor Configuration In environmental engineering, particularly in water & waste water treatment reactors used are of 3 types – i) Batch Reactor (BR) ii) Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) iii) Plug Flow Reactor (PFR) i) Batch Reactor (BR) In this case, the reactants or inputs enter into the reactor, remain for desired time & then discharged. Ex:- BOD test ii) Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) In this case, reactants continuously enter into the reactor & the products are continuously discharged from a well-mixed vessel. Ex:- Waste water treatment iii) Plug Flow Reactor (PFR) In this case, the reactants or inputs are entered at one end & products are discharged at the other end, after spending a minimum retention time in the system. Ex:- mixing of pollutant in river flow Module – 3: ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY, SOIL CHEMISTRY, GROUND WATER RECHARGE, NOISE SOURCE & ABATEMENT Soil Chemistry The order of 10 most abundant elements in soil & crustal rocks are – In soil: O > Si > Al > Fe > C > Ca > K > Na > Mg > Ti In Crustal rock: O > Si > Al > Fe > Ca > Mg = Na > K > Ti > P Soil minerals The most common soil minerals are – Quartz - SiO2 Calcite - CaCO3 Gypsum - CaSO4.2H2O Gibbsite - Al(OH)3 Soil Salinity A soil solution is considered saline, if the electrical conductivity (EC) is greater than 4000 micro-siemens/cm or µs/cm. This condition occurs, when evaporation exceeds precipitation. If this condition continues then, saltpan will occur. General Composition of soil 1)Inorganic or Mineral matter–45% (Ca,Mg etc.) 2) Organic matter – 5% (Humus) 3) Soil water – 25% 4) Soil air – 25% Types of soil in India 1. Red soil 2. Black soil 3. Mountainous soil 4. Desert soil 5. Alluvial soil (fine grained fertile soil present in river bed) Elemental properties of soil in relation to infiltration 1. Bulk Density or Dry Density (ρb) = Md/Vt = Dry mass of soil/Total volume of soil 2. Particle Density(ρm) = Md/Vd = Dry mass of soil/Dry volume of soil 3. Porosity(φ)= (Va+Vw)/Vs = (Volume of air + Volume of water)/Volume of soil 4. The water content (ϴ) = Vw/Vs = Volume of water/ Volume of soil 5. Degree of saturation(s): - It is a measure of wetness. So, S = Vw/(Va+Vw) = (Vw/Vs)/[(Va+Vw)]/Vs = ϴ/ φ Soil Moisture Deficit (SMD) The Soil Moisture Deficit is the term used when soil moisture is below the Field Capacity (FC) of soil. Field Capacity (FC) It is the maximum % of volumetric soil moisture that a soil sample will hold freely against earth gravity. It varies from 5% for sandy soil to 30% for dry soil. Atmospheric Chemistry Primary Pollutant The Primary Pollutants are those which are emitted by identifiable manmade sources. Ex:- SOX, NOX,CO Secondary Pollutant The secondary pollutants are those formed in the atmosphere by chemical or photochemical reactions of primary pollutants. Ex:- Acid rain, Photochemical Smog Photochemical smog It is basically the product of HC(Hydrocarbon) + NOx + Sunlight PAN PAN is a class of compounds, Peroxy- Acyl- Nitrates, that are formed by photochemical reactions at the ground level. It is a key ingredient of SMOG, is a respiratory inhibitor and an eye irritant. The commonest PAN is Peroxy-Acetyl- Nitrate. reactions involving PAN totally well formation are The understood. However, the equations below give a rough pathway to the photochemical formation of PAN compounds. complex, and not PANs are secondary pollutants which are present in photochemical smog. PANs are not directly emitted as exhaust from power plants or internal combustion engines, but they are formed from other pollutants by chemical reactions in the atmosphere. Free radical reactions catalyzed by UV light from the sun oxidize unburned hydrocarbons to aldehydes, ketones & dicarbonyl compounds whose secondary reactions create peroxyacyl (the most common is the peroxyacetyl) radicals, which combine with the NO2 radical to form Peroxyacylnitrates (PANs); if the radical is peroxyacetyl, then peroxyacetylnitrate (PAN) is formed. The reactions involved, in a simplified manner, are as follows: • NO2 + hv -------> NO + O • O + O2 ---------> O3 • O3 + NO --------> NO2 + O2 When the nascent oxygen combines with hydrocarbon (i.e. HC or RC), then acyl radicals, RCO, are formed: • RC + O ----------> RCO Then these acyl radicals combine with oxygen molecule to form peroxy-acyl radicals • RCO + O2 -----> RCO3 and finally, peroxy-acyl radicals RCO3 combine with NO2 to form RCO3NO2. • RCO3 + NO2 ----------> RCO3NO2 , a peroxy-acyl nitrate If R is CH3 (methyl group) then, CH3COOONO2 or C2H3NO5 (peroxy-acetyl nitrate) is formed, which is called PAN. Vertical Temperature Profile of earth’s atmospheric Region There are basically four regions are there. • Troposphere – 0-12 km • Stratosphere – 12-50 km • Mesosphere – 50-80 km • Thermosphere – 80-700 km • The Troposphere is mostly heated by transfer of energy from the earth surface and • • • temperature decreases with altitude or height. In Stratosphere temperature increases with height due to increased absorption of UV radiation by Ozone Layer. In Mesosphere temperature decreases with height due to decreasing solar heating. In Thermosphere temperature increases with height due to absorption of highly energetic solar radiation which causes atmosphere particles in this layer to become electrically charged. Criteria Pollutants The criteria pollutants as defined by USA, EC(European Community) & WHO includes CO,NO2,SO2,Pb,PM-10(Particulate Matter of dia less than 10µm). These are generally found in urban environment. Non-Criteria Pollutants The non-criteria air pollutants are those for which emission limits from industry are set or fixed. These are more poisonous & hazardous w.r.t. criteria pollutants. Ex:- Benzene(C6H6),Carbon disulphide(CS2), Arsenic, Asbestos Acid Deposition Normal clean rain has a pH value of between 5.0 and 5.5, which is slightly acidic. However, when rain combines with sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides which are produced from power plants and automobiles the rain becomes much more acidic. Typical acid rain has a pH value of 4.0. Hydrocarbon (HC), SOX, NOX emitted from industries & vehicles are the main source of acid deposition on the earth. GHG (Green House Gases) A GHG absorbs & emits radiation within the thermal infrared range having wavelength between 700nm to 1mm i.e.700x10-9 m to 10-3m. The major GHG in order of their contribution are CO2>CFCs>CH4>N2O(Nitrous Oxide) Air Pollution Meteorology The meteorological factors are – • Wind speed & direction • Temperature & humidity • Turbulence • Atmospheric Stability • Topographic effects on meteorology Scales Air pollution emission can be measured in 3 scales- a) Microscale b) Mesoscale c) Macroscale a) Microscale It is of the order of 1km & duration is minutes to hours. Ex:- Chimney gases b) Mesoscale It is of the order of 100km & duration is hours to days. Ex:- Mountain valley wind c) Macroscale It is of the order of 1000km & duration is days to weeks. Ex:- wind over oceans & continents Wind Speed Wind speed at any height(z) can be determined using power law relationship i.e. UZ=U10(Z/Z10)P Where, UZ is wind speed at height Z mtr U10 is wind speed at 10mtr height Z is height in mtr Z10 is 10 mtr height P is exponent depends on terrain & stability class Q. Use power law velocity profile equation to determine U20,U50,U100,U200 if U10 is 5m/sec & p is 0.2. Lapse Rate In the lower troposphere, the temperature usually decreases with altitude. The rate of temperature change or gradient is known as the lapse rate. Lapse rate can be ambient or adiabatic. Ambient Lapse Rate (ALR) or Environmental Lapse Rate (ELR) The temperature change or gradient with respect to rising altitude is known as ambient lapse rate & it varies from day to day & day to night. This is the actual change of temperature with altitude for the stationary atmosphere. Adiabatic Lapse Rate The temperature change of a parcel of air against rising altitude under adiabatic condition (i.e. occurring without the addition or loss of heat) is called the adiabatic lapse rate. Adiabatic Lapse Rate can be of two types- i) Dry Adiabatic Lapse Rate(DALR) ii) Moist adiabatic lapse rate (MALR) or Saturated adiabatic lapse rate(SALR) For dry air i.e. DALR value is 0.980C per 100mtr or approximately 10C per 100mtr or 100C per KM height. For moist air i.e. MALR value is 0.550C per 100mtr or approximately 0.60C per 100mtr or 60C per KM height. Pasquill – Gifford stability classes Atmospheric Dispersion For determining atmospheric dispersion, generally 5 models are used like – • Gaussian model • Numerical model • Statistical model • Emperical model • Physical model Out of the above models, Gaussian model is generally used. The various assumptions of Gaussian model are – i) There is no variation in wind speed & direction between the source & receptor. ii) All discharges remain in the atmosphere. iii) Dispersion doesn’t occur in the downward direction. iv) Emission rates are assumed constant & continuous. Equipment Selection & Design The Equipment Selection & Design is made on the basis of the types of compounds which are required to be removed. Generally, compounds can be of three types – a) Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) b) Inorganic Compounds c) Particulate matter The major types of equipments which are used are – i) Incinerators ii) Absorbers iii) Adsorbers iv) Condensors v) Filters vi) Scrubbers or wet collectors- It is an apparatus using water or solution for purifying gases or vapours vii) Various particle collection devices like ESP (Electrostatic Precipitator) viii) Impingement separators- By density difference, it separates solids from gases ESP (Electrostatic Precipitator) An electrostatic precipitator (ESP) is a highly efficient filtration device that removes fine particles, like dust and smoke, from a flowing gas using the force of an induced electrostatic charge minimally impeding the flow of gases through the unit. Basic Working Principle of ESP In high- voltage electrostatic field, affected by the electric field force, gas ionization takes place. There are tremendous amount of electrons and ions existing in the ioni zed gas. After the dust particles are combined with these electrons and ions, they will be polarized, most of them are negatively polarized. Under the action of the field force, negatively charged particles migrates towards the positive electrode and in turn release electrons and attach to the positive electrode. When the particles agglomerate and the layers reach a certain thickness on the plate, rapping system will start to work and the particles will be dislodged from the collecting plate by vibration and falling into the hopper. That ends the collection process. The efficiency of an ESP with plate collector is given by Anderson-Deutsch equation which can be expressed as follows- Efficiency = 1- e(-AW/Q) where, A = area of the plates in square mtr W= particle sedimentation velocity in an electric field in mtr/sec Q= Gas flow rate in m3/sec Q. A quantity of 50 m3/sec of air flows from a cement manufacturing facility. It contains cement particles whose settling velocity is 0.12 mtr/sec. If 99% removal ef ficiency is required, calculate the surface area of the ESP or design an ESP. Q. Calculate the percentage increase in area of the ESP plates, if the efficiency of the ESP unit is to be increased from 99% to 99.7%. Given the flow rate is 50m3/sec & particulate velocity is 0.15mtr/sec. Q. The drift velocity of fly ash particle is given by the empirical equation w= 1.5X105 dp, where dp is particle size. Determine the plate area required to remove particles of dia 0.7µm with removal efficiency 95%. Flow to ESP is 5m3/sec. Noise Pollution Sounds are mechanical waves of pressure which allow us to hear & listen. Sounds can be transmitted through solid, liquid & gas. Generally human beings can perceive sound frequencies between 20 Hz & 20 KHz. Noise is a sound, that is loud, unpleasant, unexpected or undesired. Sounds, particularly loud ones, that disturb people or make it difficult to hear wanted sounds, are called noise. Noise is a subset of sound. Sources of Noise Pollution Sources can be classified into outside & inside. Outside include construction sites, road traffic, airport, factories etc. Inside include phones, tv, radio, home appliances etc. Main source is urbanization & increasing population Source Normal conversation Alarm Clock Car horn Jet Gunshot Rocket Launching Sound in dB 60 80 120 130 140 180 Effects of Noise Pollution Lack of productivity • Sleep disturbance • • Causes stress & depression • Hormone imbalance • Higher heart rate Noise Control or Attenuation Noise has following medium. Source→Transmission Path →Receiver The acoustic treatment of above three can help in attenuation. Ways to reduce Noise Pollution • Wear ear plugs • Avoid using multiple appliances at a time • Keep vehicles & machines in proper condition • Buildings can be designed with suitable noise absorbing material for the walls, windows, and ceilings. • Social awareness programs should be taken up to educate the public about the causes and effects of noise pollution. Physical Properties of Sound The various physical properties of sound are – • Amplitude(A)- Amplitude is maximum or minimum pressure. • Wavelength(λ)- Wavelength is the distance between successive crest or trough. • Time Period (T or P)- Time period is the time gap between successive crest or trough • Frequency(f)- Frequency is the number of complete pressure variations or cycles per second. • Speed of sound(c)- Speed of sound is 340m/sec. Noise Criteria The various noise criteria can be – • • • LAeq (Equivalent Continuous Level) LAE (Sound Exposure Level) LAN (Sound Level Exceeded for N% of time) Indian Standard for ambient noise level Area code Area Daytime Nighttime A Industrial Area 75dB 70dB B Commercial Area 65dB 55dB C Residential Area 55dB 45dB D Silence Zone 50dB 40dB The above values are of LAeq. Inverse Square Law of sound Propagation It states that, the sound intensity(I) is inversely proportional to the square of the distance (r) it propagates. I = W/4πr2 i.e. I α 1/r2, where, W is Sound power of noise source in watt. The sound power level is measured in decibel(dB) i.e. LW=10 log(W/10-12) where, LW is sound power level in dB for 10-12 watt & W is sound power of noise source in watt. The sound pressure level is measured in decibel(dB) & is directly proportional to the square of sound pressure i.e. LP=10log{P2/(P0)2} = 20 log (P/P0) Where, LP is sound pressure level in dB, P is measured pressure in Pascal & P0 is reference pressure = 20μPa Q. The sound from a voice shouting source is 0.001W. What is the sound power level? Q.If a sound source has a pressure of 2000μPa at 10mtr distance, calculate a) Sound Pressure Level in dB b) Sound Intensity in Watt/m2 c) Sound Power in Watt. Q.If two sound sources have equal pressure of 2000μPa, then determine the sound pressure in dB. Q. An air conditioner generates a noise level of 75dB for five minutes in every hour. If the background noise level is 55dB, then calculate the LAeq. Module – 4: SOLID WASTE, HAZARDOUS WASTE & E-WASTE MANAGEMENT Solid Waste Management Solid waste is the unwanted or useless solid materials generated from combined residential, industrial and commercial activities in a given area. Management of solid waste reduces or eliminates adverse impacts on the environment and human health and supports economic development and improved quality of life. It may be categorised according to its origin (domestic, industrial, commercial, construction or institutional); according to its contents (organic materials like plastics, rubber, food items & inorganic materials like glass, metal etc); or according to hazard potential (toxic, non-toxic, flammable, radioactive, infectious etc). A number of processes are involved in effectively managing waste for a municipality. • These include monitoring, collection, transport, processing, recycling and disposal. The order or hierarchy of solid waste management includes – i) Waste prevention & minimization ii) Reuse & Recycling iii) Transformation iv) Landfill Reuse A newly purchased product is put to another use after the first use is completed. Recycling It is the processing of used materials or waste into new products to prevent waste of potentially useful materials. Properties of MSW (Municipal Solid Waste) The various properties of MSW includes – i) Physical Properties of MSW ii) Biological Properties of MSW iii) Chemical & Energy Properties of MSW i) Physical Properties of MSW The various Physical Properties of MSW are – a) Particle Size Distribution b) Density & Moisture Content c) Field Capacity d) Shear Strength e) Hydraulic Conductivity a) Particle Size Distribution Particle size is measured in terms of size of screens in mm through which wastes are passing. This distribution will provide the information of various materials present. b) Density & Moisture Content Density is mass per unit volume, which is a useful physical parameter used for separating various wastes from each other before treatment. The moisture content is expressed as mass of water vapour per unit mass of substance. Moisture Content (%) = {(a-b)/a}X100 Where, ‘a’ is initial mass of sample & ‘b’ is mass of sample after drying c) Field Capacity (FC) It is the maximum percentage of volumetric soil moisture that a MSW sample will hold freely against earth’s gravity. FC can be calculated by – FC = 0.6 – 0.55{W/(4500+W)} Where, W is overburden weight in Kg. d) Shear Strength Solid wastes when compacted usually have high shearing strength & hence don’t flow on standing, but sludge has poor shearing strength & therefore very often sludge is co-disposed with MSW. e) Hydraulic Conductivity Sludge in landfills tend to resist the movement of water through them due to low hydraulic conductivity, as sludge has high moisture content. ii) Biological Properties of MSW Organic or biological matter in MSW is significant for the energy recovery by biodegradation. Biodegradation can be accomplished either by aerobic or anaerobic process. The biodegradability of the organic fraction of MSW is given by – BF = 0.83 - 0.028LC Where, BF is Biodegradable Fraction LC is Lignin(organic) Content in % of dry weight High LC will give low biodegradability. iii) Chemical & Energy Properties of MSW The various steps involved in this are – a) Proximate Analysis b) Ultimate Analysis c) Energy Content a) Proximate Analysis It deals with the determination of moisture content(W%), volatile matter(VM%), non - combustible fraction (i.e. ash%) & Fixed Carbon(FC). FC can be found out by – FC=100 - W(%) - VM(%) - ash(%) FC is the solid combustible residue that remains after the material is heated & the volatile matter is ejected. b) Ultimate Analysis It is the elemental analysis of essential major elements like C,H,O,N,P,S in percentage mass. c) Energy Content Heating value or calorific value of MSW may be defined as the amount of heat liberated in calorie, when a gram of MSW is burnt. It gives the amount of organic matter present in the MSW. Generally, terms like E, Hu, Hwf, Hawf are used to express energy content. E is Energy Content Hu is LHV(Lower Heat Value) i.e. energy received from waste as collected from site Hwf is NHV(Normal Heat Value) i.e. energy received from water-free waste Hawf is HHV(Higher Heat Value) i.e. energy received from ash-water-free waste Hu = Hawf x B – 2.445 x W Where, B is flammable fraction or combustible component W is moisture content fraction or water content The energy content of MSW can be determined from following equations – i) Dulong Equation ii) Khan Equation i) Dulong Equation Hawf =337(C )+1419{(H)-0.125(O)} +93(S) +23(N) Where, C, H, O, S, N are the % by weight of each element present in the material. ii) Khan Equation E= 0.051{F + 3.6(CP)} + 0.352(PLR) Where, E = Energy content, F = % of food material by weight CP = % of Cardboard & Paper by weight PLR = % of Plastic & Rubber by weight Separation of MSW The different major components of MSW must be separated from one & the other in order to have suitable management of MSW. The component separation can be done at the household or at the industry i.e. at the source or at the transfer station or at the final destination, where mechanical sorting or separation is possible. Storage & Transport of MSW It depends on types of collection facility available & materials present, which can be – i) Door Step Collection ii) Regular Roadside Collection iii) Dustbins at market places iv) Community Recycle bin Integrated Waste Management The ideal integrated waste management plan might have following priorities – i) Minimize all components of waste fraction. ii) Recycle paper, cardboard, non-ferrous metals. iii) Reuse plastics, ferrous metals, glass. iv) Compost food fraction of MSW. v) Incinerate the remaining food waste. vi) Landfill the remaining after proper treatment. Land fill vs Open Dump A Sanitary Landfill is a carefully engineered tract of land, designed by engineers. The system consists of a large excavated area in the ground, with a thick lining of plastic over which there is a compacted clay liner. The bottom of the pit also has a liner that helps in preventing the liquid waste (that comes out from the solid waste mostly if rainwater is soaked in the landfill) from leaking through, as it could contaminate the water supply. This liquid waste that gets collected is called leachate. The compacted garbage (or refuse) is then added to the landfill in the form of organized layers (layers of garbage alternating with layers of soil). This is done for the elimination of any unpleasant odors and to expedite the rotting or decomposition process. When the landfill is fully covered, it is further sealed by a layer of compacted clay. Moreover, a gas (methane) is often produced as the waste deteriorates due to which a system is required to collect and pump it. If this is not managed effective ly, the methane gas can explode. The methane collected can be utilized to generate electricity. In most Western Countries, there are different types of landfills, mainly depending on the nature of waste materials. A landfill is built for each of the garbage types like household waste, hazardous chemicals or radioactive waste, construction waste, etc. An open dump, as the name suggests, is an open area typically outside city limits where the garbage is dumped; this usually results in very unhygienic conditions and often pollutes the groundwater nearby, from toxic chemicals leaching into the groundwater. Leachate in Landfills Leachate is the contaminated water in landfills which arrive at the landfill site through external precipitation. The amount of leachate produced in a landfill depends on it’s water balance, which can be expressed as follows – LC = PR + SRT – SRO – EP – ST Where, LC is Leachate, PR is Precipitation SRT is Surface Run To i.e. water outside the site entering the landfill SRO is Surface Run-off EP is Evapotranspiraton ST is Change in water storage Q. Calculate the Landfill area requirement for 20 years for a city of population of about 5 lakhs. Assume MSW generation as 500gm per capita per day & density of MSW is 500kg/m 3. Hazardous Waste Management Hazardous waste is defined as, any waste which because of it’s physical, chemical quality, quantity and infectious characteristics can cause significant hazards to human health or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed. A substance is hazardous, if it exhibits one or more of the following characteristics. i) Ignitable:- The substance causes or enhances fire. ii) Reactive:- The substance reacts with other materials & may explode. iii) Corrosive:- The substance destroys tissues or metals. iv) Toxic:- The substance is a danger to health, water, food & air. Hazardous Category Nature of Waste Explosive Oxidiser Highly Flammable Flammable Irritant Harmful H1 H2 H3A H3B H4 H5 Generation of Hazardous Waste Industry Type Battery Electroplating Printing Textiles Hazardous Substances Cd, Pb, Ag, Zn Co,Cr,Cu,Zn As,Cr, Cu,Pb,Se Cr, Cu, Organics Medical Hazardous Wastes These are the wastes generated from hospitals, medical colleges, nursing homes, clinical laboratories & operation theatres etc. Medical hazardous wastes include – i) Expired or Obsolete medicines ii) Infectious dressing materials iii) Pathological wastes from medical laboratories & operation theatres iv) Wastes from dental clinics etc. Household Hazardous Waste The household hazardous wastes come from kitchen, bathroom, garage, garden etc. It may include – i)Used or Exhausted batteries ii)Chemicals like dyes, perfumes iii)Pesticides, herbicides, used oils, lubricants etc. Transportation of Hazardous Waste The data or information required for Transportation of Hazardous Waste are – i) Waste Generator ii) Composition of Waste iii) Physical Appearance iv) Method of Packaging v) ADR/RID classification ADR means transport of dangerous goods by road RID means transport of dangerous goods by rail vi) UN Number(United Nation Number) ADR/RID classification Class 1a Item Description Explosive Items Items loaded with explosives Detonators & similar types of goods Gases, Compressed, Condensed or 1b 1c 2 dissolved under pressure 3 Flammable Liquids UN Number (United Nation Number) The UN numbers range from UN0001 to about UN3500 and are assigned by the United Nations Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods. UN Number 1001 1002 1003 1005 Hazardous Item Acetylene Dissolved Compressed Air Liquefied air, refrigerated NH3, dry, liquefied Treatment of Hazardous waste i) Thermal Treatment (Incineration) ii) Chemical Treatment (Neutralization) iii) Physical Treatment (Filtration, Flocculation) iv) Disposal (Secure Landfill) Incineration Incineration can be defined as controlled high temperature oxidation of primarily organic compounds to produce CO2 & H2O with non-objectionable by-products. 3 T’s of Incineration i) Time ii) Temperature iii) Turbulence i) Time Adequate residence time for solids for complete destruction or breaking of bonds. It depends on feed rate, incinerator dimension & rotation speed. ii) Temperature High enough temperature is required for destruction of hazardous waste. iii) Turbulence Sufficient turbulence with adequate air or oxygen for mixing of waste with oxygen. This depends on rotation speed & incinerator types. Types of Incinerator i) Rotary Kiln ii) Liquid injection iii) Plasma Arc Destruction iv) Wet Air Oxidation V) Fluidized Bed Combustion i) Rotary Kiln This is most common type of incinerator. Here Chemical destruction of waste occurs. ii) Liquid injection This is for treating liquid organic waste. iii) Plasma Arc Destruction In this case, electric arc of very high temperature is used. iv) Wet Air Oxidation It is an aqueous phase oxidation where materials are exposed to gaseous source of oxygen. v) Fluidized Bed Combustion This is suitable for uniform types of waste. In this case, heat transfer is very fast & uniform. Rotary kiln incinerator A rotary kiln incinerator is typically a slightly inclined rotating cylinder, with dimensions around 2 m in diameter and 10 m long, on a pilot plant scale. There is a firebrick or refractory lining inside the cylinder. The kiln can handle all sorts of wastes and hazardous wastes including solids, liquids, sludges and gases. Partially combusted gases are often passed through a secondary combustion chamber for complete combustion. By the nature of its design and construction, the three Ts of combustion are adhered here - good contact or residence time, fair degree of turbulence, and operating at a high enough temperature. A schematic diagram is below : DRE (Destruction & Removal Efficiency) Destruction and removal efficiency (DRE) is the efficiency of the unit (kiln) in destruction and removal of a particular targeted organic compound. In incineration DRE of above 99% is required. DRE can be calculated by using the following formula – DRE= {(Win – Wout)/Win} x 100 Where, Win is mass feed rate of specific organic component to the incinerator Wout is mass emission rate of same organic component from the incinerator CE(Combustion Efficiency) Combustion efficiency is a measurement of how well the fuel being burned or is being utilized in the combustion process. CE can be calculated by using the following formula – CE = {(CCO2 – CCO)/CCO2} x 100 Where, CCO2 is concentration of CO2 in the emitted gas CCO is concentration of CO in the emitted gas Q. Find out CE(Combustion Efficiency) & DRE(Destruction & Removal Efficiency) of an incinerator from the following data – i) Input of phenolic waste is 18.2% & outlet phenol is 0.04% ii) Outlet gas concentration of CO is 0.1% & CO2 is 25.7% E-Waste Management E- waste or Electrical/Electronics waste is an environment killer. Today’s electronic gadgets, tomorrow’s electronic wastes. 'E-waste' means waste from electrical and electronic equipments; whole or in part or rejects from their manufacturing and repair process which are intended to be discarded as waste. E-waste is the term used to cover all items of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) an d its parts that have been discarded by its owner as waste without the intent of re -use. It is also referred to as WEEE (Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment) or electronic waste or e-scrap in different regions. Electronic waste or e-waste describes discarded electrical or electronic devices & used electronics which are destined for reuse, resale, recycling, or disposal are also considered e - waste. Informal processing of e-waste in developing countries can lead to adverse human health effects and environmental pollution. It is the fastest growing portion of municipal waste & its management will prevent - • Pollution of ground water. • Acidification of soil. • Emission of toxic fumes and gases. • Release of harmful gases into the air. Sources/Types of E-Waste 1. Waste generated from the products used for data processing such as computers, computer devices like monitor, speakers, keyboards, printers etc. 2. Electronic devices used for entertainment like TV, DVDs, and CD players. 3. Equipment or devices used for communication like phones, landline phones, fax etc. 4. Household equipment’s like vacuum cleaner, microwave ovens, washing machines, air conditioners etc. 5. Audio, visual components such as VCRs, Stereo equipment etc. Components of E-Waste EEE contains various materials including hazardous, valuable and scarce metals. Common hazardous materials found in e-waste are heavy metals (such as mercury, lead, cadmium etc.) E-Waste also contains many valuable materials (such as iron, copper, aluminum and plastics) and precious metals (like gold, silver, platinum and palladium) that can be recycled. In fact, up to 60 elements from the periodic table can be found in complex electronics, and many of them are recoverable, though it is not always economic to do so presently. From the resource perspective, e-waste is a potential “urban mine” that could provide a great amount of secondary resources for remanufacture and recycling. E-Waste Composition (Approx.) • Monitors - 10% , • Television -10%, • Computers,Televisions, Fax, Printers etc.-15% , • DVD/VCR Player, CD Player, Radio etc.- 15% , • Refrigerators -20% , • Washing Machine, Dryers, AC, Vacuum Cleaners etc.- 30% Is E-Waste hazardous? E-Waste in itself is not hazardous. However, the hazardous constituents present in t he e- waste render it hazardous & when such wastes are dismantled & processed, they pose hazard to health and environment. Reasons of E-waste generation • Advancement in technology. • Changes in style, fashion and status • Products nearing the end of their useful life • Not taking precautions while using them How E-Waste handled currently in India & across the world? Around 90% of the e-waste generated in India are handled by the informal sectors. Incineration & Landfilling are used currently for majority of e waste. Incineration i.e. E- Waste are destroyed by burning which produces harmful gases. Land filling which often leads to contaminate water and soil. Very less percentage of e -waste is recycled RoHS and WEEE directives • Companies selling electrical and electronic goods in the European Union must conform to the EU legislation for electrical and electronic equipment (EEE). The two most important directives are: • The Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE), which sets out the responsibilities of EEE producers for the collection and recycling of their products at the end of their lifecycle. • The Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive (RoHS), which bans the use of certain hazardous substances (such as lead, mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium and some polybrominated flame retardants) in EEE. • WEEE and RoHS Directives are complex pieces of legislation that apply to a similar range of products. • Each directive imposes obligations and outcomes that EU Member States must achieve. However, neither directive dictates how the Member States must fulfill their obligations. Therefore, when exporting to Europe, U.S. exporters need to be mindful that national rules for implementing each directive will differ from country to country. Effects of e-waste on the environment Emissions from E-Waste create environmental damage. Toxic chemicals from e-waste enter the "soil-crop- food pathway,” and these are non-biodegradable and cause soil pollution. E- Waste dumping yards and nearby places are polluted and cause health hazards. Effects of e-waste on human body Elements present in e-waste affect human body in various ways. Lead damage to central and peripheral nervous systems , blood systems and kidney damage and affects brain development of children. Chromium leads to asthmatic bronchitis & DNA damage. Cadmium leads to toxic irreversible effects on human health & accumulates in kidney and liver. causing neural damage Mercury leads to chronic damage to brain and respiratory system. Plastics including PVC - Burning produces dioxin which can cause reproductive and developmental problems, Immune system damage & Interfere with regulatory hormones etc. Disposal of e-waste We should ensure safe disposal of these e-waste, because – 1. Land fill disposal allows heavy metals to leach into ground water. 2. Incineration makes hazardous materials pollute air. 3. Disposal to water is dangerous and cause water and soil contamination. Methods of Recycling Disassembly/Dismantling It is the systematic removal of components , parts or a group of parts or a subassembly from a product in e-waste. Upgrading It includes comminuting(breaking) and separation of materials using mechanical/physical or metallurgical processing . Materials recovery The materials are recovered by recycling facilities. The plastic, glass, metals can be recovered by sorting them before mixing them with other waste. Advantages of recycling e-waste • Assets recovery • Reduction of need for landfills • Resale and reuse • Creation of jobs • E waste has emerged as one of the fastest growing waste streams world wide today. • • Reuse and Recycle are more beneficial than simple disposal. Electronic gadgets, without proper disposal can cause environmental harm How to Dispose E-waste • Donate working older equipment to schools colleges or government entities in need. • If computers are out of order then return it to the manufacturers. (HCL and Wipro in India has best take back service) • Send waste goods to authorized recycling facility for proper disposal. Probable Solutions • Need for stringent health standards and environmental protection laws in India • Extended producer responsibility • Import of waste under license • Producer-public-government cooperation • Awareness program, following safer and efficient methods • Choosing safer technology and cleaner substitute • Monitoring of compliance rules • Reduction of waste at source • Recognition to the unorganized sectors in India. • Designing of products using environment friendly raw items can make a change. • Government should take steps to reduce e-waste disposal. E- Waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2011 • E- Waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2011 were notified in 2011 and had come • into force since 1st May, 2012. In order to ensure effective implementation of E-Waste Rules, Government of India modified the above one on 23.03.2016 which has been effective from 01-10-2016. • These rules are applicable to every producer, consumer or bulk consumer, collection centre, dismantler and recycler of e-waste involved in the manufacture, sale, purchase and processing of electrical and electronic equipment or components • Two categories of electrical and electronic equipment namely – • • (i) IT and Telecommunication Equipment and (ii) Consumer Electricals and Electronics such as TVs, Washing Machines, Refrigerators Air Conditioners including fluorescent and other mercury containing lamps are covered under these Rules. Waste Minimization Waste minimization is necessary to - i) Control pollution ii) Decrease the depletion rate of resources iii) Increase efficiency & hence profitability Elements of a waste minimization strategy It includes – i) Reduction at source ii) Recycle/ Reuse iii) Treatment iv) Disposal Waste Minimization Hierarchy Waste Reduction Techniques It has four major categories. i) Inventory Management ii) Production Process Modification iii) Volume Reduction iv) Recovery i) Inventory Management Inventory means detailed list of articles, goods, property. Inventory management includes – a) Inventory Control b) Materials Control ii) Production Process Modification It includes – a) Operational & maintenance procedures b) Materials Change c) Process equipment modification iii) Volume Reduction It includes – a) Source Segregation b) Concentration iv) Recovery It includes – a) on-site b) off-site Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) LCA is an useful environmental management tool. Any product may have the following stages in it’s lifecycle – i) Raw material acquisition ii) Bulk material processing iii) Engineered & specialty materials production iv) Manufacturing & assembly v) Uses & services vi) Retirement or expired vii) Disposal Phases of LCA i) Planning ii) Screening iii) Data Collection iv) Data treatment v) Evaluation Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is a process that requires consideration of the environment & public participation in the decision-making process of project development. Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is an important management tool for ensuring optimal use of natural resources for sustainable development. Origin of EIA All ecosystems including human beings have threshold of tolerance for pollution & disturbances, beyond which the system may suffer anything from temporary upsets to complete destruction. After second world war industrial & agricultural practices began to cause environmental damage which crossed the thresholds & lead to origin of EIA. Stages of EIA The stages of EIA include – i) Screening ii) Scoping iii) EIS preparation iv) Review i) Screening By screening, it is to be decided which projects should be subject to environmental assessment. ii) Scoping It is the process which defines the key or important issues that should be included in the environmental assessment. iii) EIS preparation It is the scientific & objective analysis of the scale, significance & importance of impacts identified. iv) Review The review panel guides the study & then advises the decision makers. EIA Procedure There are generally three options for establishing EIA procedures. i) Legislative Option i.e. Legal approach ii) Middle Ground Option i.e. within accepted planning & Procedures iii) Policy Option i.e. within the administrative policy of government Project Screening for EIA The success of EIA depends on effective coverage & application of projects. The various methods commonly used to select projects for EIA are – i) The use of positive (EIA required) & negative (EIA not required) list ii) The use of project criteria iii) The sensitive area criteria iv) Matrices v) Initial Environmental Evaluation(IEE) Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) IEE is a mini-EIA. It requires a description of the environment & the development & the identification of environmental impacts those are anticipated. Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) EIS is a review document prepared for assessment in the EIA process. Scope Studies of EIS Scoping is the procedure for establishing the TOR (Terms Of Reference) for the EIS. In general, the objectives would be to identify the concerns & issues those need attention, necessary for public involvement & to prepare a detailed report for the investigation of specific issues associated with the development. Preparation of an EIS One of the important elements of any project is the preparation of documentation to communicate the findings & conclusions of the study. The value of the project is sharply diminished, if it’s findings don’t reach it’s requisite results or intended audiences. The important points to be considered are – i) Planning ii) Purpose iii) Audience iv) Structure Review of an EIS The functions of the review authority includes- i) The scope of the assessment i.e. which projects should be subjected to a full or partial EIS. ii) General or specific guidelines & advice on the methods of EIS. iii) Formulate the TOR(Terms Of Reference) & initiate a detailed EIS. iv) Ensure that, the EIS had been adequately completed within the TOR. Module – 5: ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS, LAWS AND HUMAN HEALTH Environmental Gradients The environment or environmental factors are not similar over the globe or around the earth, giving rise to Environmental Gradients & due to which different species live in different places. The physical, chemical factors like light, temperature & PH are known as conditions & the factors the organism actually uses like food, water, shelter are known as resources. There is a global gradient change from the equator towards north or south. This is a normally distributed bell-shaped curve, as the change in environmental conditions are gradual from equator towards north or south. This curve is best described by a Gaussian (Normal) Distribution function, of the form f(x)=e-x2. But, pollution can make it skew-shaped i.e. sharp decrease of curve towards left or right from range of optimum. Limiting Factors The resources in shortage of supply or the conditions over which the species has the smallest range of optimum will limit the species function & is called the limiting factor. Ex:- Plant growth is strongly correlated with rain, but in arid region sufficient light is available, but water scarcity is there which is the limiting factor. The tolerance of species to different environmental conditions or resources level vary from each other. The favourable environmental factors to a species provide wide tolerance curve & broad range of optimum known as Eurytopic factors. The unfavourable environmental factors to a species provide narrow tolerance curve & narrow range of optimum known as Stenotopic factors. Regulatory Structure of Indian Env. Laws • Central Govt. MOEF CPCB State Govt. State Dept. of Env. SPCB Regional Offices MoEF – Ministry of Environment & Forest, Government of India CPCB – Central Pollution Control Board SPCB – State Pollution Control Board Indian Env. Laws • Water Laws • Air Laws • Wildlife & Forest Laws • General Env. Laws Water Laws The various env. Laws on water are – 1) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act – 1974 2) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act rules – 1975 3) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Cess Act – 1977 4) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, rules & amendments – 1992 Objectives of Water Law The objectives are – a) Prevention & control of water pollution b) Maintaining good quality of water c) Establishment of boards for the prevention & control of water pollution. Air Laws The various env. Laws on air are – 1) The air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act – 1981 2)The air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act rules – 1982 3) Atomic Energy Act – 1982 4) Motor Vehicles Act – 1988 Objectives of Air Law The objectives are – a) Prevention & control of air pollution b) Maintaining good quality of air c) Establishment of boards for the prevention & control of air pollution Wildlife & Forest Laws The various env. Laws for wildlife & forest are- 1) The wildlife protection act – 1972 2) The wildlife protection act and amendments – 1991 3) The forest conservation act – 1980 4) The national forest policy – 1988 Objectives of Wildlife & Forest Laws The Objectives are – a) Protection & conservation of wildlife b) To preserve biodiversity c) To maintain essential ecological processes & life supporting systems. General Env. Laws The various laws in this category are – 1) The environmental protection act (EPA) – 1986 or Umbrella act 2) Hazardous waste (management & handling) rules – 1989 3) Biomedical waste (management & handling) rules – 1998 Objectives of Umbrella act • Protection & improvement of environment & prevention of hazards to all living creatures. • Maintenance of harmonious relationship between human beings & their environment. National Green Tribunal (NGT) The Indian govt. established a National Green Tribunal in October 2010, headed by a former judge of the supreme court. It is a tribunal exclusively dedicated to environmental issues. This body was established by an act of parliament i.e. National Green Tribunal Act of 2010, which will deal with all matters related to and arising out of environmental issues. Eco-labelling of products An eco-label is used to mark a consumer product to indicate that it is environment- friendly with regards to its manufacture and use. The label means that the product satisfies certain eco-friendly criteria laid down by the govt. In1991, the govt. of india launched its first eco - label called Eco-mark for easy identification of environment-friendly products. Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty or CTBT bans nuclear explosive testing for everyone, everywhere, in all environments. CTBT makes very difficult for the countries to test or develop any nuclear weapon. Some Important env. Laws 1. London Law of Sea (1962) is for prevention of sea pollution by oil. 2.Stockholm Agreement (1972) is for banning of ocean dumping wastes. 3. Montreal Protocol (1987) is for eliminating CFCs & other ozone depleting substances. 4. Rio Summit (1992) is with its objectives on sustainable development. Kyoto Protocol The Kyoto Protocol (1992) was signed to try and limit Greenhouse gases, based on the premise that Global Warming is occurring due to increased Greenhouse gas emissions. Paris Agreement The Paris Agreement of 2015 is to combat climate change and reduce the temperature rise to less than 2°C per century. Environmental Institutions in India 1. TERI(Tata Energy Research Institute) established in1974. 2. NEERI(National Environment Engineering Research Institute) established in1958. 3. EPTRI(Environmental Protection Training and Research Institute) established in 1990. 4. IIFM(Indian Institute of Forest Management) established in 1982. 5. WII(Wildlife Institution of India) established in 1982 etc. Environmental movements in India 1. Chipko movement started in 1973 to fight against deforestation. 2. Silent valley movement started against setting up of a 75MW hydroelectric project to protect species of flora and fauna. 3. Narmada Bachao Andolan started against a multipurpose project over river narmada by Baba Amte & Medha Patker. 4. Baliyapal Movement started against acquiring cultivated lands for testing missiles etc. Important Env. Data The idea of sustainable development was defined for the first time by the world commission on environment and development in the year----- • 1987 World Wildlife Fund was founded in ---- • 1961 Earth day is observed on ---- • April 22. World environment day is celebrated every year on ----- • 5th June. First International Conference on environment was held on ---- • June,1972. Green Revolution The Green Revolution within India commenced in the early 1960s that led to an increase in food grain production, especially in Punjab, Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh. Major milestones in this undertaking were the development of high-yielding varieties of wheat, and rust resistant strains of wheat. Environment & Human Health Env. Conditions Affecting Health i) Cleanliness of working area ii) Proper Lighting arrangement iii) Sufficient Temperature & Ventilation iv) Noise control V) Dust control Vi) Proper Working space & seating arrangements Factors affecting Health Physical factors like unhygienic living conditions, lack of education & overcrowding in small areas lead to health problems. Chemical factors like improper or excess use of pesticides, herbicides and exposure to toxic, hazardous and radioactive substances lead to health problems. Climate changing factors Diseases of human and Their Control Interaction of the agents like micro-organisms with the hosts like human beings and the environment can lead to various diseases. Following three factors are important in this case. • • • sufficient strength of micro-organisms, lower immunity of the person & favouring environment for the transmission of agents Prevention can be done by - • Enforcing immunization laws • Providing health education to all • Implementing good hand washing procedures. Common Diseases • Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver and often caused by viral infection. • Typhoid is an acute illness associated with fever can be caused by bacteria salmonella typhi & spread to other people by contaminated water. • Malaria is caused by a parasite called plasmodium which is transmitted to human beings by the bite of infected female anopheles species mosquitoes. • Dengue fever is an infection caused by dengue viruses. Role of IT in Env. & Human Health • • IT or Information Technology, is one of the fastest growing recent technologies & as technology is advancing, the role of IT is increasing day by day. IT is used in the development & application of computational tools to acquire, store, organize, achieve, analyze & visualize various data which can be used for observation & protection of env. & human health. Role of IT in environment • A large amount of information is easily available through remote sensing technology, GIS(Geographic Information System) & GPS(Global Positioning System) which can be used for various environmental purposes. • This data and knowledge about global environment can be used for mapping & monitoring various natural resources, thereby helping in various environmental studies. • GIS helps in detecting the existence of species of flora & fauna & counting the numbers of animals like tiger, elephant etc. • MoEF(Ministry of Env. & Forest) & GOI(Govt. of India) have established ENVIS (Environmental Information System) in 1982 in different organizations for providing important information. Role of IT in Human Health • • • IT helps in the development of biotechnology, gene engineering, research & developments in drug technologies. IT plays a major role for a better human health in the fields like bioinformatics and online medical transcription. IT can be used for audio, visual & data communications for medical consultation, nursing & medical education. • IT helps in spreading awareness about endemic, epidemic & communicable diseases. • Using Remote sensing & GIS, areas which are prone to diseases like malaria, dengue etc. can be identified & accordingly steps for prevention or spreading of these diseases can be taken. DISCLAIMER: The courseware material prepared may contain some text, figures and diagrams taken from google images and other readily available web sources. The contents are prepared for the use of students in Silicon Institute of Technology as additional reference material, and not for any commercial purpose.