FOREWORD 

This  is  the  second  iteration  of  preparing  our  own  courseware  material,  after  successful 
completion  of a similar  task undertaken  a few years ago.  These contents have been carefully 
prepared and should  serve as excellent  auxiliary  material  for both  instructors  and students.   

The  Special  Academic  Group,  Autonomy  (SAGA)  was  formed  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
preparing  courseware contents  primarily  in  the  first-year  theory  subjects;  a few second-year 
subjects were also included.   The subjects for the first year were - Basic Electrical  Engineering, 
Basic  Electronics  Engineering,  Computer  Programming,  Data  Structures  and  Algorithms, 
Engineering  Mathematics  I and II, Engineering  Physics, Engineering  Chemistry,  Constitution 
of India,  Environmental  Science and Engineering  and Communicative  and Technical  English.   
For  the second  year,  the subjects  for which  courseware material  was prepared  were Analog 
Electronic  Circuits,  Digital  Systems  Design,  Circuit  Theory  and  Measurements  and 
Instruments. 
Faculty  members from all  the departments contributed  to the task. They were, in  no particular 
order,  Nalini  Singh,  Bimal  Meher,  Saumyaranjan  Dash,  Mukti  Routray,  Susmita  Biswal, 
Manasa Dash,  Bipin  Tripathy,  Sibasankar  Nayak,  Janmejay  Senapati,  Subrat  Sahu,  Pradeep 
Moharana,  Rupambika  Pattanaik,  Dhananjay  Tripathy,  Jagadish  Patra, Sachin  Das, Deepak 
Ranjan  Nayak,  Amulya  Roul,  Bodhisattva  Dash,  Sanghamitra  Das,  Gyana  Ranjan  Biswal, 
Nibedita  Swain  and Rajan Mishra. 

The entire  group  worked  diligently  to  successfully  complete  the  task which  included  a peer 
review of the material.  I take this opportunity  to thank all the members of the SAGA group  for 
a job  well  done.   

I  sincerely  hope  that  this  courseware material  comes  in  handy  and  is  utilized  to  the  fullest 
extent.  These are readily  available  additional  resources prepared in accordance with the Silicon 
autonomy  syllabus,  to complement  textbooks  and classroom  lectures. If there are any errors, I 
would  be grateful  if  they are brought  to my notice  so that we can correct them in  subsequent 
versions. 

Dr. Jaideep Talukdar, Principal 
Silicon Institute of Technology 
Bhubaneswar  
December 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Module  – 1: WATER TREATMENT 

Hardness:  
Hardness of water is a characteristic property by which water “'prevents lathering of soap”. 

Causes: 

•  The  hardness  of  water  is  due  to  presence  of  certain  salts  (mainly  bicarbonates, 
sulphates and Chlorides) of Ca, Mg and few other heavy metal salts dissolved in water. 
A sample of hard water when treated with soap (sodium or potassium salt of higher 
fatty acid like oleic, palmitic or stearic) do not produce lather with soap, but on the 
other hand forms a white scum or precipitate. 

• The precipitate is formed due to insoluble soaps of Ca and Mg. 

Reactions:- 

2C17H35COONa  +  CaCl2  →  Ca(C17H35COO)2 + NaCl 

Sodium Stearate (Sodium soap) hardness 

Calcium Stearate (Insoluble) 

2 C17H35COONa + MgSO4 

→ 

(C17H35COO)2Mg + Na2SO4 
Magnesium Stearate (Insoluble) 

Thus, the water which does not produce lather with soap solution readily is called Hard water 
the one which lathers easily on shaking with soap solution is called soft water. 

Causes of Hardness: 

Hardness of water is due to the presence of Bicarbonates, Chlorides, Sulphates and Nitrates 
of  Calcium  and  Magnesium.  These  soluble salts  get  mixed with  natural  water  due  to  the 
following reasons: 

1. When natural water containing CO2  flows over the rocks  of the limestone (CaCO3) and 
Dolomite (CaCO3 &  MgCO3),  they get converted into soluble bicarbonates. Thus,  water 
gets hardness. 

CaCO3 + H2O  + CO2 
Insoluble 

→ Ca (HCO3)2 
Soluble 

2.  When natural water flows over the rocks containing chlorides and sulphates and Nitrates 
of Calcium and magnesium, these salts dissolve in water. Thus water gets hardness.  

 
 
Disadvantages  of Hard  Water: 

1.  In Domestic use: 

>  Washing: Hard  water, when used for washing purposes, does not producing lather freely 
with soap. As a result cleaning quality of soap is decreased and a lot of it is wasted.  

>  Bathing: Hard water does not lather freely with soap solution, but produces sticky scum  
on the bathtub and body. Thus, the cleaning quality of soap is depressed and a lot of it is 
wasted. 

>  Cooking: The boiling point of water is increased because of presence of salts. Hence more 

fuel and time are required for cooking. 

>  Drinking: Hard water causes bad effects on our digestive system. Moreover, the possibility 

of forming calcium oxalate crystals in urinary tracks is increased. 

2.  Industrial Use: 

>  Textile  Industry:  Hard  water  causes  wastage  of  soap.  Precipitates  of  calcium  and 

magnesium soaps adhere to the fabrics and cause problem. 

>  Sugar Industry: The water which containing sulphates, nitrates, alkali carbonates are used 

in sugar refining, cause difficulties in the crystallization of sugar. 

>  Dyeing Industry: The dissolved salts in hard  water  may reacts  with costly dyes forming 
precipitates. 

>  Paper Industry: Calcium, magnesium, Iron salts in water may affect the quality of paper.  

>  Pharmaceutical  Industry:  Hard  water  may  cause  some  undesirable  products  while 

preparation of pharmaceutical products. 

3.  Steam generation in Boilers: 

>  For  steam  generation, boilers are  almost  invariably employed. If  the  hard  water  is  fed 
directly to  the boilers, there arise many  troubles such  as: Scales &  sludges formation, 
Corrosion, Priming & Foaming and Caustic embrittlement. 

TYPES OF HARDNESS 

Hardness of water is mainly two types: 
1. Temporary Hardness 

2. Permanent Hardness 

1.  Temporary  Hardness: Temporary  Hardness mainly caused  by the presence of  dissolved 

bicarbonates of Calcium, Magnesium (Ca (HCO3)2, Mg (HCO3)2). Temporary Hardness can be 
largely removed by boiling of water. 

Ca (HCO3)2 

→  CaCO3  + H2O + CO2 

Calcium bicarbonate 

Mg (HCO3)2  → Mg (OH)2  + 2CO2 

Magnesium bicarbonate 

2.  Permanent  Hardness:  It  is  due  to  the  presence  of  dissolved Chlorides,  Nitrates  and 
Sulphates of Calcium, Magnesium, Iron  and other metals. Permanent hardness res ponsible 
salts  are  CaCl2,,  MgCl2,  CaSO4,  MgSO4,  FeSO4,  Al2(SO4)3.  Permanent Hardness  cannot  be 

removed by boiling but it can be removed by the use of chemical agents. 

EXPRESSION  AND UNITS OF HARDNESS 

The  expression of  hardness  producing  salts  usually  expre ssed in  terms  of  an  equivalent 
amount of CaCO3. Calcium Carbonate is chosen as a standard because: 

i. 

ii. 

Its  molecular weight (100)  and  equivalent weight (50)  is a  whole number, so  the 
calculations in water analysis can be simplified. 
It is the most insoluble salt that can be precipitated in water treatment. 

The conversion of the hardness causing salts into CaCO 3 equivalents can be achieved by using 
the following formula: 

Degree of Hardness = The weight of hardness causing salts x 100  (Molecular weight of CaCO3)                      

Units of Hardness: 
1.  Parts  per Million (ppm): The  number of parts  of calcium  carbonate  equivalent hardness 
presents in 106 parts of water. 

1ppm = 1 part of CaCO3 eq hardness in 106  parts of water. 

2.  Milligrams per litre (mg/1):  The number of  milligrams of calcium  carbonate  equivalent 
hardness presents in litre of water. 
1 mg/L = 1 mg of CaCO3 eq hardness in 1 litre of water. 
But one litre of water weights =1 kg =1000g  = 1000  x 1000  mg = 106 mg = 1 ppm. 

3.  Clark’s  degree  (°Cl):  The  number  of  parts  of  calcium  carbonate  equivalent hardness 
presents in 70,000  or (7x104) parts of water. 
1° Clarke = 1 part of CaCO3 eq hardness per 70,000  parts of water. 

4.  Degree  French  (°Fr):  The  number  of  parts  of  calcium  carbonate  equivalent hardness 
presents in 105 parts of water. 
1° Fr = 1 part of CaCO3 hardness eq per 105  parts of water. 

5.  Milli-equivalent per liter (meq/L):- is the number of milli-equivalents of hardness present 
per liter. 

1meq/L=  1meq  of  CaCO3  per 
liter of  water  =  10-3x  50  g  of 
CaCO3 eq. per liter 

= 50 mg of CaCO3 eq. per liter = 50 mg/L of CaCO3 eq. = 50ppm. 

Relationship between various units of hardness: 

1 ppm 
1 mg/L 
1 ° Cl 
1 ° Fr 

= 1 mg/L 
= 1 ppm 
= 1.433°  Fr 
= 10 ppm 

= 0.1° Fr= 0.07°  Cl = 0.02  meq/ L 
= 0.07°  Cl 
= 0.1° Fr 
= 14.3 ppm  = 14.3  mg/L 
= 0.7° Cl  
= 10 mg/L 

calculation of equivalents of CaCO3: 

Salt/ion 

Molar 

mass 

Chemical Equivalent 
or 
Equivalent 
Weight 

Multiplication 
converting 
for 
equivalents of CaCO3 

factor 
into 

Ca(HCO3)2 
Mg(HCO3)2 

CaSO4 
CaCl2 
MgSO4 
MgCl2 
CaCO3 
MgCO3 
CO2 
Ca(NO3)2 
Mg(NO3)2 
- 
HCO3
OH- 
CO2 
NaAlO2 
Al2(SO4)3 
FeSO4.7H2O 
H+ 
HCl 

162 
146 
136 
111 
120 
95 
100 
84 
44 
164 
148 
61 
17 
60 
82 
342 
278 
1 
36.5 

81 
73 
68 
55.5 
60 
47.5 
50 
42 
22 
82 
74 
61 
17 
30 
82 
57 
139 
1 
1 

100/162 
100/146 
100/136 
100/111 
100/120 
100/95 
100/100 
100/84 
100/44 
100/164 
100/148 
100/122 
100/34 
100/60 
100/164 
100/114 
100/278 
100/2 
100/73 

Problem-1: A sample of water is found to contains following dissolving salts in milligrams per 
litre Mg(HCO3)2  =  73,  CaCl2  =  111,  Ca(HCO3)2  =  81,  MgSO4  =  40  and  MgCl2  =  95.  Calculate 
temporary and permanent hardness and total hardness. 

 
 
Solution: 
Amount  of  the  hardness 
Name  of  the  hardness 
causing salts(mg/Lit) 
causing salts 
73 
Mg(HCO3)2 
111 
CaCl2 
81 
Ca(HCO3)2 
40 
MgSO4 
MgCl2 
95 
Temporary hardness =  Mg(HCO3)2 + Ca(HCO3)2 

Amounts  equivalent  to 

Molecular  weight  of 
hardness causing salts 
146 
111 
162 
120 
95 

CaCO3 (mg/Lit) 

73x100/146  = 50 
111x100/111  = 100 
81x100/162  = 50 
40x100/120  = 33.3 
= 100 
95x100/95 

= 50 + 50  = 100mgs/Lit. 
Permanent hardness = CaCl2+ MgSO4 + MgCl2 

= 100  + 33.3  + 100  = 233.3mgs/Lit. 

Total hardness = Temporary hardness + Permanent hardness = 100  + 233.3  = 333.3mgs/Lit.   

POTABLE WATER AND ITS SPECIFICATIONS 

Water  free from  contaminants  or  water  that  is  safe for  human  consumption  is called 

potable water. The following are the specifications of water drinking purpose. 
1.  The water should be clear (colorless), odorless and pleasant taste. 
2.  The optimum hardness of water must be 125ppm. 
3.  The pH of potable water should be 7.0 to 8.5. 
4.  The  recommended  maximum  concentration  of  total  dissolved  solids  (TDS)  in  potable 

water must not exceed 500  ppm. 

5.  The turbidity in drinking water should not exceed 25 ppm. 
6.  The water must be free from heavy metals like Lead, Arsenic, Chromium and Manganese. 
7.  The water must be free from pathogenic bacteria 
8.  The water must be free from dissolved gases like H2S, CO2 and NH3. 

BOILER  TROUBLES 

A boiler is a closed vessel in which water under pressure is transformed into steam by 
the application of heat. The steam so generated is used in i ndustries and generation of power. 
In modern pressure boilers and laboratories, the water required is used pure than the distilled 
water. 
A boiler feed water should correspond with the following composition: 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Its hardness should be below 0.2ppm. 
Its caustic alkalinity (due to OH-) should lie between 0.15ppm to 0.45ppm. 
Its soda alkalinity (due to Na2CO3) should lie in between 0.45ppm to 1ppm. 
It’s should be free from dissolved gases like O2, CO2, in order to prevent boiler corrosion. 

 
 
 
Excess of impurities in the boiler feed water generally cause the following problems: 

1.  Sludge’s and Scale formation 2. Caustic embrittlement 

Boilers  are  employed  for  the  steam  generation  in  power  plants,  where  water  as 
continuously heated to produce steam. As more and more water is removed from water in 
the  form  of  steam,  the  boiler water  gets  concentrated  with  dissolved salts  progressively 
reaches the saturation point. At this point the dissolved salts are precipitated out and slowly 
settle on the inner walls of the boiler plate. The precipitation takes place in two ways. 

SLUDGES 

Sludge  is  a  soft,  loosy  and  slimy  precipitate  formed  within  the  boiler.  It  is  formed  at 
comparatively colder portions of the boiler and collects in the area where flow rate is slow.  

Ex: MgCO3, MgCl2, CaCl2, MgSO4. 

Reasons for formation of sludges: 

The  dissolved salts  whose  solubility is  more  in  hot  water  and  less in  cold  water  produce 
sludges. 
Disadvantages of sludges: 
1.  Sludges are bad conductors of heat and results in the wastage of heat and fuel.  
2.  Excessive sludge formation leads to the settling of sludge in slow circulation areas such as 
pipe connections, plug openings, gauge-glass connections leading to the choking of the 
pipes. 

Prevention of sludge formation: 
a.  By using soft water which is free from dissolved salts like MgCO3, MgCl2, CaCl2 and MgSO4 

can prevent sludge formation. 

b.  By blow down operation carried out frequently can prevent sludge formation.  

SCALES 

Scales are hard, adhering precipitates formed on the inner walls of the boilers. Scales are stick 
very firmly on to the inner walls of the boiler. It is removed with chisel and hammer. Scales 
are formed by decomposition of calcium bicarbonate in low pressure boilers. It is most due 
to the presence of CaSO4, MgCl 2, Silica, Ca(HCO)2. 

 
Reasons for formation  of scales: 
a.  Decomposition of  calcium  bicarbonate:  The  calcium  bicarbonate  at  high  temperature 
decomposes to  calcium  carbonate  which is  insoluble salt, forms  scale in  low pressure 
boilers. 

Ca(HCO3)2   →CaCO3 + H2O + CO2 

b.  Hydrolysis of  Magnesium  salts:  Magnesium  salts  gets  hydrolyzed at  high  temperature 

forming Mg(OH)2  precipitation which forms salt type scale. 
MgCl2 + H2O  → Mg(OH)2 + 2HCl 

c.  Decomposition of calcium sulphate: The solubility of CaSO4 in water decreases with the 
increase in temperature and forms precipitation on the surface of the boiler further which 
forms hard scale. This type of scales is formed in high-pressure boilers. 

d.  Presence of  silica: SiO2  present even in  small quantities, deposits as  Calcium  silicates 
(CaSiO3) or  Magnesium  silicates (MgSiO3).  The  deposits form  hard  scale  and  are  very 
difficult to remove. 

Disadvantages  of Scales: 

Wastage  of  heat  and  fuels:  Scales  poor  thermal  conductivity  so  that  rate  of  heat 
transformation is Thickness (mm))  0.325     0.625     1.25         2.5    
Wastage of fuel   10% 

15%  50%  80%    150% 

12 

1.  Lowering of boiler safety is due to overheating of the boiler material becomes softer and 

weaker, which causes distortion of boiler. 

2.  Decrease in efficiency of the boiler due to scales deposited in the values and cond ensers 

of the boiler cause choking. 

3.  Danger  of explosion which happens the formation of  the scales, the boiler plate faces 
higher temperature outside and lesser temperature inside due to uneven expansion. The 
water  comes  suddenly contact  with overheated  portion  and  larger  amount  steam  is 
formed immediately, this results in development of sudden  high pressure which  may 
cause explosion of the boiler. 

Prevention of scales: 
a. 
b.  By giving thermal shocks, by sudden heating and sudden cooling which makes scale brittle 

If the scale formation is soft it can be removed by a scrapper, wire brush. 

c. 

and removed by scrubbing with wire brush. 
If scale is very hard that is formed by CaCO3 can be removed by washing with 5-10%  HCl 
and CaSO4 can be removed with EDTA solution. 

Distinguish between sludge and scale. 

  Sludge                                                   

 Scale 

They are soft, loose and slimy precipitate. 

They form hard deposits. 

They form non-adherent deposits and can  be 
easily removed. 

They  stick  firmly  to  the  inner  surface  of  the 
boiler and are very difficult to remove. 

They are formed by substances like 

CaCl2, MgCl2, MgSO4, MgCO3, etc. 
They  are  formed  at  comparatively  colder 
portions of the boiler. 

They decrease efficiency of boiler but are less 
dangerous. 

They  are  formed  by  substances  like  CaSO4, 
Mg(OH)2, etc. 

They are formed at heated portions of the 

boiler. 
They decrease efficiency of boiler and chances 
of explosion are also there. 

They can be removed by blow down operation. They can’t be removed by blow down operation. 

CAUSTIC EMBRITTLEMENT 

The  formation of brittle and  in  crystalline cracks  in  the boiler shell is called caustic 
embrittlement. The  main  reason  for  this  is  the  presence  of  alkali -metal carbonates  and 
bicarbonates in feed water. In lime-soda process, it is likely that, some residual Na2CO3 is still 
present in the softened water. This Na2CO3 decomposes to give NaOH and CO2, due to which 
the boiler water becomes “Caustic Soda”. 
Na2CO3+ H2O → 2NaOH + CO2 
The  H2O  evaporates,  the  concentration  of  NaOH  increase  progressively  creating  a 
concentration  cell as  given below thus  dissolving the  iron  of  the boiler as  sodium ferrate 
(Na2FeO2). 

(-)Anode: ‘Fe’ at bents 

Conc.NaOH 

Dil.NaOH 

‘Fe’ at plane Surface: Cathode (+) 

This causes embrittlement of boiler parts such as bends, joints, reverts etc, due to which the 
boiler gets fail. The iron at plane surfaces surrounded by dilute NaOH becomes cathodic while 
the iron at bends and joints surrounded by highly concentrated NaOH becomes anodic which 
consequently decayed or corroded. 

Caustic embrittlement can be prevented: 
a.  By maintaining the pH value of water and neutralization of alkali. 
b.  By using Sodium Phosphate as softening reagents, in the external treatment of boilers.  
c.  Caustic  embrittlement can  also  be  prevented  by  adding  Tannin  or  Lignin  or  Sodium 
sulphate which prevents the infiltration of caustic-soda solution blocking the hair-cracks. 

d.  By  adding  Na2SO4  to  boiler water.  Na2SO4  is  added  to  boiler water  so  that  the  ratio 
Na2SO4Concentration  and NaOH concentration is kept as 1:1:,2:1,3:1  in boilers working 

 
 
 
 
respectively at pressure up to 10,20  and 30  atmosphere. 

NaOH Concentration is kept as 1:1:2:1  and 3:1 in boilers working respectively at pressures up 
to 10,  20 and 30 atmospheres. 

Disadvantages  of caustic embrittlement: 

The cracking or weakening of the boiler metal causes failure of the boiler. 

INTERNAL  TREATMENT  OF WATER 

Suitable chemicals are added to the boiler water either to precipitate or to convert 
the  scale  into  compounds  is  called  internal  treatment  of  the  boiler feed  water.  Internal 
treatment can be done following types. 
1.  Calgon conditioning: Involves in adding calgon to  boiler water. It prevents the scale and 
sludge formation by forming soluble complex compound with CaSO4. 
Calgon = Sodium hexa meta phosphate = Na2 [Na4 (PO3)6] 

Na2  [Na4  (PO3)6]    →2Na+  + 
[Na4P6O18]-2 2CaSO4  +  [Na4P6O18]  -2    → 
[Ca2 P6O18]-2 + 2Na2SO4 

2.  Phosphate conditioning: The addition of sodium phosphate in hard water reacts with the 
hardness causing agents and  gives calcium and  magnesium phosphates which are soft and 
non-adhere and can be removed easily by blow-down operation. 
3CaCl2 + 2 Na3PO4 → Ca3(PO4)2 + 6NaCl 
3MgSO4  + 2 Na3PO4 → Mg3(PO4)2 + 3Na2SO4 

Generally three types of Phosphates are employed. 

i.  Tri sodium Phosphate (Na3PO4): is too alkaline used for treat to too acidic water. 
ii.  Di sodium Phosphate (Na2  HPO4): is weakly alkaline used for  treat to  weakly acidic 
water. 
iii.  Sodium dihydrogen Phosphate (Na H2PO4):  is too acidic used for treat to too alkaline 
water. 

3.  Colloidal conditioning: The addition of organic substances such as  Kerosene, tannin, Gel. 
These substances gets coated over the scale forming precipitates and gives a loose and non -
sticky precipitates which can be removed by using blow-down operation. 

Priming: 
When a boiler is steaming (i.e., producing steam) rapidly, some particles of the liquid water 
are carried along with the steam. This process of ‘wet steam’ formation is known as ‘Priming’. 

Causes: 
Priming is caused by: 

 
1.  The presence of large amount of dissolved salts 
2.  High steam velocities 
3.  Sudden boiling 
4.  Improper boiler design 

5.  Sudden increase in steam production rate. 
Prevention: 
1.  By fitting mechanical purifiers 
2.  Avoiding rapid change in steam rate 
3.  Maintaining low water levels in boilers 
4.  Effective softening and filtration of boiler feed water 
5.  Blow down of the boiler. 

Foaming: 

The phenomenon of formation of persistent foam or bubbles on the surface of water inside 
the boiler, which do not break easily. 

Causes: 

1.  Pure water has very little foaming whereas the water containing dissolved impurities and 
suspended matter has a greater tendency to produce foam. 

2.  The presence of large quantity of suspended impurities and oils lowers the surface tension 
producing foam. 

Prevention: 

1.  Adding antifoaming chemicals like castor oil. 

2.  Besides castor  oil, Gallic acid and tannic  acids, corn oil,  cotton seed oil, sperm oil, bees 
wax, etc., are also used as antifoaming agents. 

3.  Blow down operation of the boiler can prevent foaming. 

4.  Removing oil form boiler water by adding compounds like sodium aluminate. 

Disadvantages  of Priming and Foaming: 

Priming and Foaming usually occur together. They are objectionable because: - 

1.  The  dissolved salts  in  boiler  water  are  carried  by  the  wet  steam  to  super  heater  and 
turbine blades where they get deposited and reduce the efficiency. 

2.  The  dissolved salts  enter  the  parts  of  other  machinery  where steam  is  used  thereby 

decreasing the life of machinery. 

3.  The actual height of the water column cannot be judged thereby making the maintenance 

of boiler pressure becomes difficult. 

Boiler corrosion: 

•  The  decay  of  boiler  material  by  chemical  or  electrochemical  attack  by  its 

environment is known as “Boiler corrosion”. 

•  The main reasons for boiler corrosion are:- 

Dissolved  Oxygen: water contains  usually about  8ml  of dissolved oxygen per liter at  room 

temperature. Disadvantages of dissolved oxygen: 

In presence of prevailing high temperature, the dissolved Oxygen attacks boiler material as 
follows: 

2Fe+ 2H2O+  O2  → 2Fe(OH)2  
4Fe(OH)2+ O2  →2[Fe2O3.2H2O] (rust) 

Removal of dissolved Oxygen: 

By adding calculated quantity of Sodium sulphite (Na2SO3) or hydrazine(N2H4) or sodium 

1) 
sulphide (Na2S). 

2Na2SO3+ O2 --------------► 2 Na2SO4 

N2H4+ O2 
Na2S + 2O2 

 ------------ 
 ------------► Na2SO4 

N2+ 2H2O 

Hydrazine is an ideal internal treatment chemical for the removal of dissolved oxygen.  
Azamina 8001-RD  (a polyvalent organic compound) has  been employed for degassing 
water in minimum time. 

2) 
By  Mechanical  de-aeration i.e., spraying water  through  a  perforated plate fitted in 
degasification tower, heated from sides and connected to a  vacuum pump as  shown in the 
figure. 

High temperature, low pressure and  large exposed surface (provided by perforated plates) 
reduce the dissolved oxygen in water. 

 
Dissolved Carbon  dioxide: has  a  slow corrosive  effect on  the materials  of boiler 

3) 
plate. 

Under the high temperature and pressure the bicarbonates decompose to produce CO2. 

Mg(HCO3)2-------►  MgCO3 + H2O + CO2 

Disadvantages  of CO2: 

It has slow corrosive effect on boiler plates by producing the carbonic acid.  
CO2 + H2O-----------  ► H2CO3 

Removal of CO2: 

By adding calculated amount of ammonia. 
2NH4OH  +  CO2    →    (NH4)2CO3 +  H2O  By 
mechanical  deaeration  process  along 
with oxygen. 

Acids from dissolved salts: water containing dissolved Mg salts liberate acids on hydrolysis. 

Ex:  MgCl2 + 2H2O  → Mg(OH)2 + 2HCl 

Disadvantages  of acids: 

The acids react with the iron of boiler plate in a chain reaction producing HCl again 
and again. 

Fe+2HCl  → FeCl2 + H2 
FeCl2+2H2O  →Fe(OH)2 +2HCl 

Presence of even a small amount of MgCl 2 will have corrosion of iron to a large extent. 

Prevention of acid corrosion: 
1) 
By softening of boiler water to remove MgCl2 from the water. 
2) 
By frequent blow down operation. 
3) 
Addition of inhibitors to form a  thin film on the surface of the boiler protecting the 
metal from attack. Sodium silicates, sodium phosphates and sodium chromate acts as good 
corrosion inhibitors. 

External Removal Process 

1)  Ion exchange process is also known as demineralization process. Ion- Exchange resins are 
insoluble. Cross linked long chain organic polymers with a micro porous structure, and the 
“functional  Groups”  attached  to  the  chains  are  responsible  for  the  ion-exchanging 
properties. Resins with  acidic  functional group  are  capable  of  exchanging H+  ions with 
other cations. Resins with basic functional groups are capable of exchanging OH-ions with 
other anions. 

Resins are classified as: 
i.  Cation Exchange Resins ii. Anion Exchange Resins. 

i. Cation Exchange Resins: Cation exchange resins are  styrene divinyl benzene co -polymers, 
which on sulphonation (or) carboxylation, which contains -COOH, -SO3H functional groups 
which responsible for exchanging their hydrogen ions with cations in water. 

2RH  +  Ca(HCO)2    →  R2Ca  +  H2CO3    ,    2RH  + 
Mg(HCO)2 →R2Mg + H2CO3    , 2RH + CaCl2  → R2Ca 
+ 2HCl    

ii.  Anion  Exchange  Resins:  Anion  exchange  resins  are  Phenol  formaldehyde (or)  amine 
formaldehyde  copolymers,  which  contains  amino  or  basic  functional  groups  which 
responsible for exchanging their OH- ions with anions in water. 

ROH + HCl → RCl + H2O 
2ROH + H2SO4  → R2SO4  + 2H2O 
ROH + H2CO3   →RHCO3 + H2O(ROH = anion exchange resin) 

In  ion-exchange process,  hard  water  is  allowed to  pass  through  cation  exchange  resins, 
which  remove  Ca+2  and  Mg+2  ions  and  exchange  equivalent amount  of  H+  ions. Anions 
exchange  resins  remove  bicarbonates,  chlorides  and  sulphates  from  water  exchange 
equivalent amount of OH- ions. 
Thus by passing hard water through cation hardness is observed by the following reactions. 
H+ and OH-ions, thus released in water from respective cation and anion exchange columns, 
get combined to produce water molecules. 

H+ + OH-  →H2O 

The water coming out from the exchanger is ion free from anions and cations. Thus water 
of zero hardness is obtained. 

Regeneration: When cation exchanger losses capacity of producing H+ ions and exchanger 
losses capacity of producing OH- ions, they are said to be exhausted. The exhausted cation 
exchanger is regenerated by passing it through dilute sulphuric acid. 

, 

R2Ca + 2HCl → 2RH  + 
CaCl2 
  R2Mg  + 
2H2SO4        →2RH  + 
MgSO4 

The exhausted anion exchanger is regenerated by passing a dilute solution of N aOH. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCl + NaOH → ROH +NaCl 

RHCO3 + NaOH → ROH + NaHCO3 

Merits of Ion-exchange process: 

>  The process can be used to soften highly acidic or alkaline water. 
> 
>  So it is very good for treating water for use in high-pressure boilers. 

It produces water of very low hardness (2ppm) 

Demerits of Ion-exchange process: 

>  The equipment is costly and more expensive chemicals are needed. 

> If water contains turbidity, the output of the process is reduced. The turbidity must be 
below 10ppm; else it has to be removed by coagulation and filtration. 

2) Lime-Soda process: 
In this process, lime  [(Ca(OH)2)] and soda [Na2CO3] are the reagents used to precipitate the 
dissolved 
salts of Ca +2 and Mg+2 as CaCO3 and Mg(OH)2 which are later on filtered off. 

Lime  reacts  with  temporary  hardness  causing  salts,  Mg  permanent  hardness,  CO2,  acids, 
bicarbonates and alums. 

Lime cannot remove permanent hardness which should be removed by soda.  

Precautions to be followed during process: 

Only calculated amounts of lime and soda must be added. Excess of lime-soda causes boiler 
troubles like corrosion and caustic embrittlement. 

The chemical reactions of lime and soda are slow and the precipitates CaCO 3 and Mg(OH)2 
are very fine. 

Proper time must be given for the reactions of softening process to complete, because all the 
reactions of the process are slow. 

Cold lime soda process: 

Calculated amounts of lime and soda are mixed with water at room temperature. Cold lime 
soda process provides water containing residual hardness of 50-60  ppm. 
The  precipitates formed are  finely divided which do  not settle down and  can"t  be  filtered 
easily. 
So, it is essential to add small amounts of coagulants (like alum, aluminium sulphate, sodium 
aluminate) which hydrolyse to flocculent, gelatinous precipitate of Al(OH) 3 and entraps the 
precipitate. 

Use of sodium aluminate as Coagulant also helps in the removal of silica as well as oil present 

 
in the water. 

NaAlO2+ 2H2O → NaOH + Al(OH)3 

Al2(SO4)3 + 3Ca(HCO3)2 →2Al(OH)3 |+ 3CaSO4+  6CO2 

Method: 

Raw water and calculated quantities of chemicals (lime+soda+coagulant) are fed from the top 
into inner vertical circular chamber fitted with a vertical rotating shaft carrying a number of 
paddles. 

As the raw water and chemicals flow down, there is vigorous stirring and continuous mixing 
whereby softening of water takes place. 

The heavy sludge settles down in the outer chamber by the time softened water reaches up.  

The softened water then passes through a  filtering media (made of wood fibres) to ensure 
complete removal of sludge. 

Filtered soft water finally flows out continuously through the outlet at the top  and  sludge 
settling at the bottom of the outer chamber is drawn off occasionally.  

Hot Soda Lime Process: 

It involves treating water with softening chemicals at a temperature of 800-1500  C. Since hot 
process is operated at a temperature close to the boiling point of the solution, so  

Raw wate feed intet 

Super  heated 
steam  inlet 

Reaction 

tank 

Conical 
sedimentation 

tank 

Precipitate d 
sludges 
[CaCO and 
Mg (OH) ] 

Precipitate d 
sludge  outlet 

a) The reaction proceeds faster, 

b)  Softening capacity of hot process is 

increased, 

c)  The  precipitate  and  sludge  formed 

Softened  water 

settle  down  rapidly  and  hence  no 

coagulants are needed, 

Coarse  sandlayB 

d)  Much  of  the dissolved  gases  (CO2) 

Gravels 

layer 

are driven out, 

Fitered 
softened 
water 
outlet 

e)  Viscosity  of softened water is lower 

so  filtration  of  water  becomes  much 

easier. 

Hot lime soda process produces water of residual hardness of 15-30ppm. 

Process: 

It contains essentially three parts 

 
 
1)  A reaction tank in which water, chemical and steam are thoroughly mixed. 
2)  A conical sedimentation vessel in which sludge settle down. 
A sand filter which ensures complete removal of sludge from the softened water. 
Advantages of Lime-Soda process: 
1)  It is very economical. 
2)  The  process increases the  pH  value of  treated water  thereby corrosion of  distribution 
pipes is reduced. 
3)  Besides removal of hardness causing salts, minerals, iron and manganese present in water 
is removed. 
4)  Due to alkaline nature, amount of pathogenic bacteria in water is considerably reduced. 
Disadvantages Of Lime-Soda Process: 
1)  Skilled supervision is required for efficient and economical softening.  
2)  Disposal of large amounts of sludge poses a problem. 
3)  This can remove hardness only up to 15ppm,  which is not good f or boilers. 

Differences between cold and hot lime soda process: - 

Sl.No. Cold Lime Soda Process 

Hot Lime Soda Process 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

It is done at room temperature. 

It  is  done  at  elevated temperatures  (84-
100  0C). 

It is slow process. 

It is rapid process. 

Use of coagulants is must. 

Coagulants are not needed. 

Filtration is not easy. 

Filtration  is  easy  as  viscosity  of  water 
becomes low at elevated temperatures. 

Softened water has residual hardness 

Softened water has residual hardness 

around 60  ppm. 

Dissolved gases are not removed. 

It has low softening capacity. 

around 15-30  ppm. 
Dissolved gases such as CO2 are 

removed to some extent. 
It has high softening capacity. 

Points to be followed while solving problems in lime soda problems: 

1)  To convert the hardness of the hardness causing salts in terms of CaCO3 equivalents. 

If  CaCO3  is  given as  hardness  causing  salt,  it  should  also  be  considered as  temporary 

2) 
hardness expressed in terms of CaCO3. 

3)  MgCO3, Mg(HCO3)2, should be converted to CaCO3 equivalents. 

4)  Some salts like NaCl, KCl, Silica, K2SO4, Fe2O3 neither cause hardness nor react with lime 
and soda. Hence they must not be considered for calculation of lime and soda required.  

 
5)  The hardness of Al2(SO4)3 must be multiplied by 3 for both lime and soda, HCl hardness 
must  be multiplied by 0.5,  Mg(HCO3)2  hardness  must  be multiplied by 2,  NaHCO3,  KHCO3, 
NaAlO2 hardness  
multiplied by  0.5  and  should  be  subtracted  for  calculation  of  amount  of  lime  and  soda 
required respectively. 

3) Zeolite Process 

Zeolite are hydrated sodium alumino siticates Na2O.Al2O3 xSiO2.yH2O. (x=2-10 and y=2- 
6) (inorganic salts). They work as water softners by replacing the calcium and magnesium ions 
in water with the sodium ions in zeolite. Zeolite Natural zeolites Synthetic zeolites 1. Natural 
zeolites Non-porous, amoamorphous  and  durable  e.g.  Na2O.  Al2O3.3SiO2.2H2O  (Natrolite) 
CaO.Al2O3.4SiO2.4H2O (Laumonite) 2. Synthetic zeolites Gel like structures, generally porous 
Na2CO3, Al2O3 and SiO2 heated together Na2O.Al2O3 xSiO2.yH2O. (x=2-10 and y=2-6) 

For softening of water by zeolite process, hard water is percolated at a specified rate through 
a bed of zeolite. Zeolite holds sodium ion loosely and can be represented as Na 2Z, where Z 
represents insoluble radical frame work. 

When the water  passes through the zeolite the hardness causing ions (Ca+2, Mg+2 etc.) are 
retained  by  the  zeolite as  CaZ  and  MgZ  respectively, while the outgoing  water  contains 
equivalent amount of sodium salts. The block diagram and chemical reactions taking place in 
zeolite softener are: 

Ca(HCO3)2    +    Na2Z     →      CaZ     +    2NaHCO3 

Mg(HCO3)2    +    Na2Z     →      MgZ     +    2NaHCO3 

CaSO4    +    Na 2Z     →      CaZ     +    Na 2SO4 

CaCl 2    +    Na 2Z     →      CaZ     +    2NaCl 

MgSO4    +    Na 2Z     →      MgZ     +    Na 2SO4 

MgCl 2    +    Na2Z     →      MgZ     +    2NaCl 

Regeneration of Zeolite Bed 

After some time, when the zeolite is completely changed into calcium and magnesium 
zeolites, then it gets exhausted (saturated with Ca+2Ca+2  and Mg+2Mg+2  ions) and it ceases 

 
  
 
 
 
 
to  soften water. It can  be regenerated and reused by treating it with a 10%  brine (sodium 
chloride) solution. Regeneration reactions are 
CaZ+2NaCl→Na2Z+CaClMgZ+2NaCl→Na2Z+MgCl2 

Advantages: 
 1. Almost complete removal of hardness (10ppm) 2. It is compact 3. Requires only less time 
for  softening  4.  No  sludge  formation  since  no  precipitate  is  formed  5.  Can  work  under 
pressure also 

- and CO3

Disadvantages   
1. More sodium salt concentration in softened water. 2. Turbidity containing water cannot be 
used 3. Process exchange only Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions but cannot exchange HCO3
2- ions. 
So cannot  be used in boilers 4.  If Fe 2+ and  Mn2+  are present in large quantities. They form 
respective zeolites so zeolites cannot be regerated 5.  Water consisting of high alkalinity or 
acidity cannot be used because zeolite is decomposed. 
Questions 
1.  How temporary hardness differs from permanent hardness? 
2.  Define hardness and estimate hardness of water by using EDTA solution? 
3.  Explain Caustic embrittlement, Scale & Sludge. 
4.  Explain determination of fluoride ions (F-) by ion selective electrode method. 
5.  Explain softening of water using Ion exchange process. 
6.  What is desalination? Explain reverse osmosis process. 
7.  Explain Steps involved in treatment of sewage water. 
8.  What is Potable water and what are its specifications. 
9.  Explain Steps involved in the treatment of potable water. 
10.  0.28  grams  of  CaCO3  were dissolved in HCl and  the solution was  made upto one litre 
with distilled water. 100 ml of the above solution required 28 ml of EDTA solution on titration. 
100  ml of hard water sample consumed 33 ml of same EDTA solution EBT indicator. 100  ml of 
this  water  after  boiling cooling and  filtering required  10  ml  of  EDTA  solution in  titration. 
Calculate the permanent and temporary hardness of water sample in ppm. 

11.  Explain the following? 

a.  Calgon conditioning and Phosphate conditioning of boiler feed water.  
b.  What is defluoridation and explain Nalgonda technique. 

12.  What  is  Hardness  and  calculate  a  sample  of  water  is  found  to  contains  following 
analytical  data  in  milligrams per  litre  Mg(HCO3)2  =  14.6,  MgCh  =  9.5,  MgSO4  =  6.0  and 
Ca(HCO3)2 = 16.2. Calculate temporary and permanent hardness of water in parts per mil lion, 
Degree Clarke’s and Degree French. 

 
 
 
 
Module  – 2: LUBRICATION AND LUBRICANTS 

A  substance which  is capable  of  reducing friction between two  surfaces  which are 
sliding  over  each  other  is  called  Lubricant.  Due  to  Lubricant  the  co-efficient of  friction 
between two rubbing surfaces is reduced. The loss of energy due to friction is considerably 
reduced in this manner. Petroleum is the main source of Lubricants, but synthetic Lubricants 
have also been prepared for specific purpose. The lubricant acts  in a number of manners. It 
acts  as  a  coolant  by  removing  the  heat  of  friction  generated  as  a  result  of  rubbing  of 
surfaces.  In  lubrication it does not allow a  direct contact  between the rubbing surfaces.  A 
thin  film  of  lubricant  lies  between  these  rubbing  surfaces  under  proper  condition  of 
lubrication. In internal combustion engines, it acts as a  seal by sealing the piston &  cylinder 
wall  at  compression  rings.  Hence  there  is  no  leakage  of  gases  at  high  pressure  in  the 
combustion chamber. Lubrication also avoids power loss in the IC engine. 

The main features of lubrication are: 

1.  It  reduces  wear  and  tear  and  surface  deformation, by  avoiding direct  contact 

between the rubbing surfaces. 

2.  It reduces the loss of energy in the form of heat by acting as a coolant. 
3.  It reduces the efficiency of the machine by reducing the waste of energy. 
4.  It reduces expansion of metal by local frictional heat. 
5.  It minimizes the liberation of frictional heat and hence avoids seizure of moving 

surfaces. 

6.  It prevents unsmooth motion relative motion of the moving or sliding parts. 
7.  It  reduces the maintenances as  well as  running cost  of the machine to  a  large 

extent. 

8.  As seen above it also acts as a seal in IC engines. 

 CLASSIFICATION  OF LUBRICANTS 

Lubricants can be broadly classified, on the basis of their physical state, as follows: (1) Liquid 
lubricants or lubricating oils; (2) Semi-solid lubricants or greases, and (3) Solid lubricants. 

1. Lubricating  oils 

Lubricating oils reduce friction and wear between two moving/sliding metallic surfaces by  

 
providing a continuous fluid film in-between them. They also act as: (a) cooling medium; (b) 
sealing agent, and (c) corrosion preventer. Good lubricating oil must possess: (a) low pressure 
(or high boiling point), (b) adequate viscosity for particular service conditions, (c) low freezing 
point, (d) high oxidation resistance. (e) Heat stability, (f) non-corrosive properties, (g) stability 
to decomposition at the operating temperatures. Lubricating oils are further classified as: 

(1) Animal  and  vegetable  oils:  Before  the  advent  of  the  petroleum  industry,  oils  of  the 
vegetable and animal origins were the most commonly used lubricants. They  possess good 
oiliness (a property by  virtue of which the  oil sticks  to the  surface of  machine parts,  even 
under  high  temperatures  and  heavy  loads).  However,  they:  (i)  are  costly,  (ii)  undergo 
oxidation easily forming gummy and acidic products and get thickened on coming in contact 
with air, (iii) have some tendency to hydrolyze, when allowed to remain in contact with moist-
air or aqueous medium. So at present, they are rarely used as such. Actually, they are used as 
"blending agent" with other '  lubricating oils (like mineral oils) to produce desired effects in 
the latter. 

 (2) Mineral  or  petroleum  oils are  obtained by distillation of petroleum. The  length of  the 
hydrocarbon  chain  in  petroleum  oils  varies  between about  12to  50  carbon  atoms.  The 
shorter-chain oils have  lower viscosity than  the  longer-chain hydrocarbons.  These  are  the 
most widely used lubricants, because they are; (i) cheap, (ii) available in abundance, and (iii) 
quite stable under service conditions. However, they possess poor oiliness as compared to 
that  of  animal and  vegetable oils. Tile oiliness of  petroleum oils can  be  increased  by  the 
addition of high molecular weight compounds like oleic acid, stearic acid, etc. 

Purification: Crude liquid petroleum oils contain lot of impurities (like wax, asphalt,etc.) and 
consequently, they have to be thoroughly purified before being put to use.(i) The wax, if not 
removed,  raises  the  pour-point  and  renders  the  lubricating  oil  unfit  for  use  at  low 
temperatures. (ii) Certain constituents get easily oxidized under working conditions and cause 
sludge formation. (iii) Some constituents mainly asphalt, undergo decomposition at  higher 
temperatures, causing carbon deposition and sludge formation. A number of processes are 
used for removing these unwanted impurities by using Dewaxing or acid refining or by solvent 
refining. 

 (3) Blended oils: No single oil saves as the most satisfactory lubricant for many of the modern 
machineries. Typical  properties of  petroleum  oils are  improved  by  incorporating  specific 
additives. These  so-called  'blended oils'  give  desired  lubricating  properties, required  for 
particular machinery. The following additives are employed 

(i) Oiliness-carriers: Oiliness of a lubricant can be increased by addition of an oiliness-carrier 
like vegetable oils (e.g., coconut oil, castor oil) and fatty acids (like palmitic acid, stearic acid, 
oleic acid. etc.). 

(ii) Extreme-pressure additives: Under  extreme-pressure, a  thick  film of  oil  is  difficult to 
maintain, and the oil need to have a high oiliness. Besides improving oiliness directly, high-
pressure additives are used. these additives contain certain materials which are absorbe d on 
the metal surface or  react chemically with metal, producing a surface a  layer of low shear-
strength  on  the  metal  surface,  thereby  preventing the  tearing  up  of  the  metal.  Another 
property of high-pressure additives is that they react, at high temperature on metal surfaces, 
forming surface alloys so as to prevent the welding together of the rubbing parts under severe 
operating conditions. 

The main substances added for high-pressure lubrication are :(a) fatty ester, acids, etc., which 
form  oxide film  with  the  metal  surface;  (i) organic  materials,  which  contain  Sulphur;  (c) 
organic  chlorine compounds;  (d) organic  phosphorus compounds. High-pressure lubricants 
also  contain  some  lead  in  order  to  produce  thin  film  of  lead  sulphide  and  other  lead 
compounds on the surfaces of machines like gear teeth. 

(iii) Pour-point depressing additives used are phenol and certain condensation products  of 
chlorinated wax with naphthalene. These prevent the separation of wax from the oil.  

(iv) Viscosity-index improvers are certain high molecular weight compounds like hexanol. 

(v) Thickeners such as polystyrene are materials usually of molecular weight between 300 and 
3,000.  They are added in order to give the lubricating oil a higher viscosity. 

(vi) Antioxidants or  inhibitors, when added to  oil, retard  oxidation of oil by  getting them- 
selves  preferentially oxidized. They  are  particularly  added  in  lubricants  used  in  internal 
combustion  engines,  turbines,  etc.,  where  oxidation  of  oil  is  a  serious  problem.  The 
antioxidants are aromatic, phenolic or amino compounds. 

(vii) Corrosion preventers are organic compounds of phosphorus or  antimony. They protect 
the metal from corrosion by preventing contact between the metal surfaces and the corrosive 
substances. 

 (viii) Abrasion inhibitors like tricresyl phosphate. 

 (ix) Antifoaming agents (like glycols and glycerol) help in decreasing foam formation.  

(x) Emulsifiers such as sodium salts of sulphonic acid. 

(xi) Deposit inhibitors are detergents such as the salts of phenol and carboxylic acids . Deposits 
are  formed  in  internal  combustion  engine,  due  to  imperfect  combustion.  Such  additive 
disperses and cleans the deposits. 

  
 
2. GREASES OR SEMI-SOLID  LUBRICANTS 

Lubricating grease is a  semi - solid, consisting of a soap  dispersed throughout liquid 
lubricating oil. The  liquid lubricant  may  be petroleum oil or  even synthetic oil and  it  may 
contain any of the additives for specific requirements. Greases are prepared by saponification 
of fat (such as tallow or fatty acid) with alkali (like lime, caustic soda, etc.), followed by adding 
hot lubricating oil while under agitation. The total amount of mineral oil added determines 
the consistency of  the finished grease. The structure of lubricating greases is that of  a gel. 
Soaps  are  gelling  agents,  which  give  an  interconnected  structure  (held  together  by 
intermolecular forces) containing the added oil. At high temperatures, the soap dissolves in 
the  oil, whereupon the  interconnected structures  cease  to  exist and  the  grease  liquefies. 
Consistency of greases may  vary from a  heavy viscous liquid to the of a  stiff solid mass. To 
improve the heat-resistance of grease, inorganic solid thickening agents (like finely divided 
clay, bentonite, colloidal silica, carbon black, etc.) are added. 

Greases have higher shear or frictional resistance than oils and, therefore, can support 
much heavier loads at  lower speeds. They also do not require as much  attention unlike the 
lubricating liquids. But greases have a  tendency to separate into oils and soaps. Grease are 
used  :  (i)  in  situations  where  oil  cannot  remain  in  place,  due  to  high  load,  low  speed, 
intermittent operation, sudden jerks, etc. e.g. rail axle boxes,   (ii) in bearing and gears that 
work at high temperatures ; (iii) in situations where bearing needs to be sealed against entry 
of dust, dirt, grit or moisture, because greases are less liable to contamination by these ; (iv) 
in situations where dripping or  spurting of oil is undesirable, because unlike oils, greases if 
used  do  not  splash  or  drip  over  articles being  prepared  by  the  machine.  For  example, in 
machines preparing paper, textiles, edible articles, etc. 

The main function of soap is thickening agent so that grease sticks firmly to the metal 
surfaces.  However, the  nature  of  the  soap  decides: (a)  the  temperature  up  to  which  the 
grease can be used; (b) its consistency; (c) Its water and oxidation resistance. So, greases are 
classified after the soap used in their manufacture. Important greases are: (i) Calcium-based 
greases  or  cup-greases  are  emulsions  of  petroleum  oils  with  calcium  soaps.  They  are, 
generally, prepared by adding requisite amount of calcium hydroxide to hot oil (like tallow) 
while under agitation. These greases are  the cheapest and  most commonly used. They are 
insoluble  in  water,  so  water  resistant.  However,  they  are  satisfactory  for  use  at  low 
temperatures, because above 80oC,  oil and soap begins to separate out. 

(ii) Soda-base greases are  petroleum oils, thickened by mixing sodium soaps. They are not 
water resistant, because the sodium soap content is soluble in water. However, they can be 
used up to 175oC.  They are suitable for use in ball bearings, where the lubricant gets heated 
due to friction. 

  
(iii) Lithium-based greases are petroleum oils, thickened by  mixing lithium soaps. They are 
water-resistant and suitable for use at low temperatures [up to 15oC]  only. 

(iv) Axle greases are very cheap resin greases, prepared by adding lime (or any heavy metal 
hydroxide) to resin and fatty oils. The mixture is thoroughly mixed and allowed to stand, when 
grease floats as stiff mass. Filters (like talc and mica) are also added to them. They are water-
resistant  and  suitable for  less delicate equipments working  under  high  loads  and  at  low 
speeds. Besides the  above, there are  greases  prepared by  dispersing solids  (like graphite, 
soapstone) in mineral oil. These are mostly used in rail axle boxes, machine bearings, tractors 
rollers, wires ropes etc. 

 3. SOLID  LUBRICANTS 

Solid lubricants are  used where: (i) operating conditions are  such that  a  lubricating 
film cannot be secured by use of lubricating oils or greases; (ii) contamination (by the entry 
of  dust  or  grit  particles)  of  lubricating  oil  or  grease  is  unacceptable,  (iii) the  operating 
temperatures or load is too high even for a semi-solid lubricant to remain in position; and (iv) 
combustible lubricants must be avoided. 

The  two  most  usual  solid  lubricants  employed are  graphite  and  molybdenum disulphide. 
Graphite consists of a multitude of flat plates, one atom thick, which are held together by only 
weak bonds, so that the force to shear the crystals parallel to the layers is low. Consequently, 
the parallel layers slide over one another easily. Usually, some organic substances are mixed 
solid lubricants so that they may stick firmly to the metal surface. 

On the other hand, molybdenum disulphide has a sandwich like structure in which a 
layer  of  a  Mo  atoms  lies  between two  layers of  S  atoms.  Poor  interlaminar attraction  is 
responsible for low shear strength in a  direction parallel to the layers. Solids lubricants are 
used either in the dry powder or mixed with water or oil. The solids fill up the low spots in the 
surfaces of moving parts and form solid films, which have low frictional resistance. The usual 
coefficient of friction between solid lubricants is between 0.005  and 0.01. 

 (a)  Graphite is the most  widely used of all solid lubricants. It  is very soapy to  touch,  non -
inflammable and not oxidized in air below 375oC.  In the absence of air, it can  be used upto 
very much higher temperatures. Graphite is used either in powdered form or as suspension. 
Suspension of graphite in oil or water is brought about with the help of an emulsifying agent 
like tannin. When graphite is dispersed in oil, it is called 'oildag' and when it is dispersed in 
water; it is called 'aquadag'. Oildag is found particularly useful in internal combustion engines, 
because it forms a film between the piston rings and the cylinder and gives a tight-fit contact, 
thereby increasing compression. On the other hand, oildag is useful where a  lubricant free 
from  oil  is  needed. e.g., foodstuffs industry.  Graphite  is  also  mixed with  greases  to  form 
graphite-greases, which are used at still higher temperatures. 

Uses:  As  lubricant  in  air-compressors,  lathes,  general  machine-shop  works,  foodstuffs 
industry,  railway  track-joints, open  gears,  chains,  cast  iron  bearings,  internal combustion 
engine, etc. (b) Molybdenum disulphide possesses very low coefficient of friction and is stable 
in air up to 400oC.  Its fine powder may be sprinkled on surfaces sliding at high velocities, when 
it fills low spots in metal surfaces, forming its film. It is also used along with solvents and in 
greases. Besides the more important graphite and molybdenum disulphide, other substances 
like soapstone, talc, mica, etc., are also used as solid lubricants. 

 4.  SYNTHETIC  LUBRICANTS 

Modern  synthetic  lubricants  possess,  in  general,  the  following  distinguishing 
characteristics: (1)  non-inflammable, (ii) high flash points, (iii) high thermal stability at high 
operating  temperatures,  (iv)  high  viscosity-index,  (v)  chemical  stability,  etc.  Important 
synthetic lubricants are given below. 

(1)  Polymerized  hydrocarbons  like  polyethylene,  polypropylene,  polybutylene  in  the 
molecular  weight range  of  500  to  50,000  are  residue-free, light in  color,  free from  non-
hydrocarbon impurities, chemically non-reactive and high temperature lubricants. 

(2)  Polyglycols  and  related  compounds  like  polyethylene  glycol,  polypropylene  glycol, 
polyglycidyl ethers, and higher polyalkylene oxides can be used as water-soluble as well as 
water-insoluble  lubricants  in  rubber  bearings  and  joints.  Polyglycidyl ethers  and  higher 
polyalkylene oxides are water-insoluble, but they can absorb a considerable amount of water.  

 (3) Organic amines, imines and amides are good synthetic lubricants, since they possess low 
pour-points and high viscosity-index. They can be used under temperature conditions of -50oC 
to 250oC 

(4) Silicones are very good  synthetic lubricants, because are not oxidized below 200oC and 
possess high viscosity-index.  

(5) Fluorocarbons are not decomposed by heat, not easily oxidizable and chemically inert and 
resistant to chemicals, except molten sodium. 

 LUBRICATING  EMULSIONS 

An  emulsion is  two-phase  system,  consisting  of  a  fairly  coarse  dispersion  of  two 
immiscible liquids, the one being dispersed as fine droplets in the other. The disperse (or the 
internal) phase is the liquid that is broken into droplets. The surrounding liquid is known as 
the continuous or external or dispersing phase. Usually, the size of dispersed drop lets varies 
from  1  to  6  micron.  A  dispersion system consisting of two  immiscible liquids is inherently 
unstable, and to increase its stability, a third agent, called emulsifier or emulsifying agent, is 
added.  Emulsifiers  are  compounds  exhibiting both  polar  and  non-polar  character.  The 
emulsifier molecule contains a hydrophobic-end and a hydrophilic end. Hydrophobic-end of 

the molecule is preferably wetted by oil; whereas the hydrophilic-end is wetted by  water. 
Thus,  emulsifier molecule is adsorbed  at  the  interface of  the two  phases  (oil and  water), 
resulting in the formation of a protective film around the dispersed droplets. A Sodium Soap 
molecule illustrates well the functioning of an emulsifier. The sodium soap is the sodium salt 
of  a  long  chain  fatty  acids  like C15H31COONa,  possessing a  hydrophilic group  -COONa  and 
hydrophobic-end, C15H31. 

Geometric  calculations have  shown that  the  maximum amount  of  dispersed phase  in  the 
other liquid can be 74.02%  of the total volume. Thus, a water-oil emulsion mixture with less 
than 26%  oil would tend to form an O/W emulsion; whereas a mixture with more than 74% 
oil would result in a W/O emulsion. Composition between 26 and 74% can result in both types 
of emulsion. 

(a) Oil in-water emulsions are obtained by adding oil containing about 3-20%  water-soluble 
emulsifying agent  to  a  suitable quantity  of  wafer. The  most  usual  emulsifying agents  are 
sodium soaps  and sodium and potassium salts of sulphonic acids. The main use of such an 
emulsion is as cooling and lubricating liquid for cutting tools. Another use is lubrication for 
certain rather heavy sliding components such as  pistons in marine diesel engines and large 
internal combustion engines. Such emulsions also give rust protection.  

(b) Water-in-oil emulsions are prepared by 'mixing together water containing about 1 to 10 
% water- soluble emulsifier (Like alkaline-earth soap, e.g., calcium stearate) with oil. These 
emulsions possess much higher viscosity than that of the oil from which they are prepared. 
An emulsion which uses about 40% water by volume is widely used to lubricate compressors 
and pneumatic tools. They provide cooling effect (due to the evaporation of water), besides 
lubrication action. 

Characteristics: 
A good lubricant generally possesses the following characteristics: 

•  A high boiling point and low freezing point (in order to stay liquid within a wide range  

of temperature) 

•  A high viscosity index. 

•  Thermal stability. 

•  Hydraulic stability. 

•  Demulsibility. 

•  Corrosion prevention. 

•  A high resistance to oxidation. 

•  Anti scoring property 

•  Water antiaffinity property 

•  Anti foaming property 

Anti scoring property:  Lubricants should have the property to prevent the scoring failure of 
tooth surface under high pressure of load. 

Water  anti  affinity  property:  Moisture  tends to  condense due to  temp. change  when the 
gears are stopped. Lubricants should have the property of isolating moisture and water from 
it. 

Anti foaming property:  Lubricants should form no foam under agitation. 

More Discussion on property: 

VISCOSITY INDEX  : Viscosity index is an expression of effect of change of temperature on the 
viscosity of oils. This change can be evaluated numerically and the result is expressed as VI. It 
Is the avg.  Decrease in viscosity of oil per degree rise in temp between 100Of  AND 2100F. 
Silicones, poly glycol ethers, diesters and trimesters have high VI. 

Drop  Point:   It  is  that  temp at  which  grease passes from  the semi liquid to  liquid state. It 
determines the upper temp limit for the application of grease. 

 FLASH POINT:  Flash point is the temperature at which the oil gives off sufficient vapors which 
can be ignited. It reflects on the capability of the oil to work at higher temperature without 
any fire hazard. 

Cloud point      It is the temperature below which wax in diesel forms a cloudy appearance.  
In general it is that  temp at which the lubricant becomes cloudy or hazy when cooled. And 
that waxes thickens the oil and clogs fuel filters and injectors in engines.  

pour  point        is the minimum temperature at  which a  lubricants turns  into semi solid and 
almost losses its flow characteristic.  Both indicate suitability of lubricant in cold  conditions 
and must be low. It reflects on the capability of the oil to work at low temperatures. 

Iodine Number:   It is the no. Of gm. equivalent of I2 to the amount of ICL absorbed  by 100 
gm of oil. Each oil has specific I N. It determines the extent of contamination of oil/ amount 
of un saturation in oil. Low IN is good for oil.ICL—Wijs solution. RCH=CHR + ICl  →RCHI-CH(Cl)R 

   IN             Oil Type                Example 

>150             drying                linseed, tung oil 

 
100-150         semidrying          castor, soyabeen 

<100             non-drying         olive, cocanut 

Aniline point: It is the minimum temp at which oil is miscible with equal amount of aniline. It 
is a  measure of  aromatic  content of an  oil. It  is an  indication of possible determination of 
rubber sealing. 

Aniline + sample oil → Homogeneous solution  → cloudiness 

Emulsion Number:   It is the property of water to get mixed with oil easily or the reverse. A 
good  lubricating oil should form  such  an  emulsion with water  which breaks  easily. This  is 
known as  demulsification. The time in seconds  in which a  given volume of  oils and  water 
separates  out  into  distinct  layers  is  called demulsification number.  A  good  lubricating oil 
should have low demulsification number. In cutting oils the higher the emulsification number, 
better the oil is. Emulsion acts both as lubricant & coolant. It is of the following types. 

OIW – (26% O+ 74% W) ---- Sodium& potassium salt of sulphuric acid as dispersed phase and 
water as medium. Milk, Vanishing cream 

WIO---   (74%  O+26%  W)----- water as dispersed phase &  oil as dispersion medium ( Butter, 
cold cream) 

Lubrication Mechanism: 

Thick Film Mechanism: In this case the sliding surfaces are separated completely by applying 
a thin uniform film of liquid lubricants between them. 

The thickness of liquid film is at least 1000  Armstrong. The liquid lubricants do not have any 
chemical affinity to the metal surface and it sticks to it due to viscosity. 

The liquid film covers all irregularities in the sliding surface and thus prevents formation of 
welded junction and hence avoids contact between sliding surface. 

The  liquid  lubricant  must  have  between sliding  surface.  The  liquid lubricant  must  have 
sufficient viscosity so as  to maintain the fluid film in its place. If viscosity is higher, a  large 

amount of energy is required. 

When the load is applied, the pressure developed in the lubricant is sufficient to keep moving 
surfaces apart and hence it known as hydrodynamic lubrication. It occurs in journal bearing. 
This type of lubrication is used in watches, clocks, electric motors, turbines etc.  

Thin Film/Boundary  Lubrication :  Boundary lubrication exists when the operating condition 
are such  that it is not possible to establish a full fluid condition, particularly at  low relative 
speeds between the moving or sliding surfaces. 

The oil film thickness may be reduced to such a degree that metal to metal contact occurs 
between  the  moving  surfaces.  The  oil  film  thickness  is  so  small  that  oiliness becomes 
predominant for boundary lubrication. 

Boundary lubrication happens when 

•  A shaft starts moving from rest. 
•  The speed is very low. 
•  The load is very high. 
•  Viscosity of the lubricant is too low. 

Examples for boundary lubrication: 

•  Guide and guide shoe in two stroke engine. 
•  Lubrication  of  the  journal  bearing  in  diesel  engines  (mainly  during  starting  and 

stopping of engine). 

•  Piston  rings  and  when  cylinder liner  is  at  TDC  and  BDC  position when  the  piston 

direction changes and if the relative speed is very slow. 

 
 
Extreme pressure Lubrication 

When the moving or sliding surfaces are under very high pressure and speed, a high 
local  temperature  is  attained.  Under  such  condition,  liquid lubricant  fails  to  stick  to  the 
moving  parts  and  may  decompose  and  even  vaporize.  To  meet  this  extreme  pressure 
condition, special additives are added to the minerals oils. These are called “extreme pressure 
lubrication."  These  additives  form  on  the  metal  surfaces  more  durable  films  capable  of 
withstanding high loads and high temperature. Additives are organic compounds like chlorine 
(as  in  chlorinated esters), sulphur  (as  in  sulphurized oils), and  p hosphorus  (as  in  tricresyl 
phosphate). 

 
 
 
Module  – 3: CORROSION 

Corrosion is the gradual deterioration of a metal from its surface due to the chemical 
or  electrochemical interaction  with  a  corrosive  environment. It  is  a  diffusion - controlled 
process so it occurs on exposed surfaces. 

Types of corrosion:    1) Chemical or Dry 

                                      2) Electrochemical or wet 

Dry corrosion:  By oxidation, By other gases, By liquid metal 

A) Oxidation: Due to direct oxidation of oxygen on metals in the absence of moisture. 

2M  +nO2→ 2M  n+ + 2nO2-  →Mn2 O3 

At low temp. all alkali and alkaline metals are oxidised easily where as at high temp. except 
Ag, Au and Pt, all other metals are oxidised. 

B) Liquid- Metal corrosion: By passing a liquid metal over a  solid metal at high temp. which 
leads to  the weakening of the metal surface either due to  its dissolution in liquid metal or 
penetration of liquid metal in to the solid surface. EX)  Coolant ( Na metal) leads to corrosion 
of cadmium in a nuclear reactor. 

C) Corrosion by other  gases : Gases  like chlorine and H2S  show corrosive effect on a  metal 
surface due to their chemical affinity. 

2Ag +Cl2 → 2AgCl   ( AgCl coating is protective) 

Sn +2Cl2 → SnCl4  ( SnCl4 is volatile and hence non-protective) 

Electrochemical  Corrosion:  It  is  mostly through  the formation of  galvanic cells. It  involves 
mostly separate anode and cathode  between which the current flows/ corrosion  at  anode 
generates metal ions/ non-metallic ions like OH- & O2- at cathode./ diffusion of ions through 
the  conducting  medium/  a  single  metal  partly  behaving  as  anode  and  cathode  due  to 
differential aeration. 

EX) Rusting of iron : 

Reactions: Oxidation  : Fe – 2e → Fe2+ 

Reduction :      

a) Oxygen Absorption    4H+  +O2 +4e  →2H2O (Acidic medium) 

                                         2H2O+  O2+4e → 4OH-  (neutral medium) 

b) Hydrogen Evolution( Absence of oxygen)   : 

                                                  2H++ 2e → H2 ( Acidic medium) 

                                              2H2O +2e → H2 +2OH-  (neutral or alkaline) 

Final Reaction  :  Fe2+ +  2OH-    →  Fe(OH)2    .  This  in presence of  excess oxygen oxidised to 
Fe(OH)3. 

Which is RUST, Fe2O3.3H2O. 

Pilling Bedworth Rule:   

Ratio of the volume of the oxide film/ coating formed to the volume of the metal consumed. 
P. B Ratio = volume of metal oxide/ volume of metal  
Also known as specific volume, it carries   significance for determining rate of corrosion.  
case-1  → volume of oxide > volume of metal, PBR > 1, Protective ( Ti, Al, Cr, Cu)  
case-2  → volume of oxide < volume of metal, PBR < 1, Non protective ( Li, Na, K, Mg)  
case-3 → volume of oxide >> volume of metal, PBR > 2, Non protective (Mo, W, Nb)  
         Metal                                        PBR 

           Pb                                             1.4 

           Ni                                              1.52 

           Cr                                              1.99 

           Cu                                             1.68 

           K                                                0.45 

           Li                                               0.78 

          Nb                                             2.61 

TYPES OF ELECTROCHEMICAL CORROSION  
PITTING CORROSION 

Pitting is one of the most destructive types of corrosion, as it can be hard to predict, 
detect and characterize. Pitting is a localized form of corrosion, in which either a local anodic 
point, or more commonly a cathodic point, forms a small corrosion cell with the surrounding 
normal surface. Once a pit has initiated, it grows into a “hole” or  “cavity” that takes on one 
of  a  variety  of  different shapes. Pits  typically penetrate  from  the  surface  downward  in  a 
vertical direction. Pitting corrosion can be caused by a local break or damage to the protective 
oxide film or  a  protective coating;  it  can  also be  caused  by  non-uniformities  in the metal 
structure  itself. Pitting is  dangerous  because it  can  lead to  failure of  the structu re  with a 
relatively low overall loss of metal. 

CREVICE CORROSION 

Crevice  corrosion  is  also  a  localized form  of  corrosion  and  usually results  from  a 
stagnant  microenvironment  in  which  there  is  a  difference  in  the  concentration  of  ions 
between two areas of a metal. Crevice corrosion occurs in shielded areas such as those under 
washers, bolt heads, gaskets, etc. where oxygen is restricted. These smaller areas allow for a 
corrosive agent  to enter but  do  not allow enough circulation within, depleting the oxy gen 
content, which prevents re-passivation. As a stagnant  solution builds, pH shifts away from 
neutral. This  growing imbalance between the crevice (microenvironment) and the external 
surface  (bulk environment) contributes to  higher rates  of  corrosion. Crev ice corrosion  can 
often occur at lower temperatures than pitting. Proper joint design helps to minimize crevice 
corrosion. 

INTERGRANULAR  CORROSION 

An examination of the microstructure of a  metal reveals the grains that form during 
solidification of  the  alloy,  as  well  as  the  grain  boundaries  between  them.  Intergranular 
corrosion can  be caused by impurities present at these grain boundaries or by the depletion 
or enrichment of an alloying element at the grain boundaries. Intergranular corrosion occurs 
along or adjacent to these grains, seriously affecting the mechanical properties of the metal 
while the bulk of the metal remain intact. 

An  example of  intergranular corrosion  is carbide  precipitation, a  chemical  reaction 
that  can  occur  when a  metal is subjected to  very high temperatures (e.g., 800°F  - 1650°F) 
and/or localized hot work such as welding. In stainless steels, during these reactions, carbon 
“consumes” the chromium, forming carbides and causing the level of chromium remaining in 
the alloy to drop below the 11% needed to sustain the spontaneously-forming passive oxide 

 
 
layer. 304L  and 316L  are  enhanced chemistries of 304  and 316  stainless that contain lower 
levels of carbon, and would provide the best corrosion resistance to carbide precipitation.  

STRESS  CORROSION CRACKING (SCC) 

Stress corrosion cracking  (SCC) is a  result of the combination of tensile stress and a 
corrosive  environment, often at  elevated temperatures. Stress  corrosion  may  result from 
external stress such as actual tensile loads on the metal or expansion/contraction due to rapid 
temperature  changes.  It  may  also  result  from  residual  stress  imparted  during  the 
manufacturing process such as from cold forming, welding, machining, grinding, etc. In stress 
corrosion, the majority of the surface usually remains intact; however, fine cracks appear in 
the microstructure, making the corrosion  hard to  detect. The cracks  typically have a  brittle 
appearance and  form and spread in a  direction perpendicular to the location of the stress. 
Selecting proper materials for a given environment (including temperature and management 
of external loads) can mitigate the potential for catastrophic failure due to SCC.  

GALVANIC CORROSION 

Galvanic corrosion is the degradation of one metal near a joint or juncture that occurs 
when  two  electrochemically dissimilar metals  are  in  electrical  contact  in  an  electrolytic 
environment; for example, when copper is in contact with steel in a saltwater environment. 
However, even when these three conditions are satisfied, there are many other factors that 
affect the potential for, and the amount of, corrosion, such as temperature and surface finish 
of the metals. Large engineered systems employing many types of metal in their construction, 
including various fastener types and materials, are susceptible to galvanic corrosion if care is 
not  exercised  during  the  design  phase.  Choosing  metals  that  are  as  close  together  as 
practicable on the galvanic series helps reduce the risk of galvanic corrosion.  

CONCLUSION 

In aqueous environments, metals may be exposed to not only uniform corrosion, but 
also to  various  types of  local corrosion  including pitting, crevice, intergranular, stress, and 
galvanic corrosion. In areas where corrosion is a concern, stainless steel products offer value 
and  protection  against  these  threats.  Stainless’ favorable  chemical  composition makes  it 
resistant  to  many  common  corrosives  while remaining  significantly more  affordable than 
specialty alloys such as titanium and Inconel® alloys. 

Stainless steel is a highly alloyed, low-carbon steel with a high (at least 11%) chromium 
content.  When  exposed to  an  oxygenated  environment, the  chromium  reacts  to  form  a 
passive oxide layer on  the  metal’s surface,  slowing further  oxidation and  providing a  self-
healing quality, which helps resist uniform and  local corrosion. Nickel helps to  stabilize the 
microstructure, increasing SCC resistance.  

Metal  corrosion  is  a  slow  process  of  destruction  of  metal  objects,  after  chemical 
reactions that occur  on the surface of metals, alloys, under the action  of the environment. 
Corrosion process is influenced by a number of internal and external factors.  

Factors affecting rate of corrosion:   

Several factors affecting the rate of the corrosion, which can be divided into two parts: 

1)  Factors affecting on metal (related to the metal) 
2)  Factors affecting on corrosive environment. 

Factors affecting the metals: 

1.    Nature of the metal: The tendency of the metal to undergo corrosion is mainly dependent 
on the nature of the metal. IN general the metal with lower el ectrode potential have more 
reactive and more susceptible for corrosion and metal with high electrode potential are less 
reactive and  less susceptible for corrosion  for egs:  metals like K,  Na, Mg,  Zn  etc  have low 
electrode potential are undergo corrosion very easily, where as noble metals like Ag, Au, Pt 
have  higher  electrode  potential,  their  corrosion  rate  are  negligible  but  there  are  few 
exception for this general trend as some metals show the property of passivity  

like Al, Cr, Ti, Ta etc. 

2.     Surface  state  of  the  metal  or  nature  of  the  corrosion  product  (passivity): 
The corrosion product is usually the oxide of the metal; the nature of the product determines 
the  rate  of  further  corrosion  process.  If  the  oxide layer,  which  forms  on  the  surface,  is 
stoichiometric,  highly  insoluble and  non-porous  in  nature  with  low  ionic  and  electronic 
conductivity then that  type of products  layer effectively prevents further corrosion,  which 
acts as a protective film. For egs: Al, Cr, Ti develop such a layer on their surf ace and become 
passive to corrosion and some metal like Ta, Zr and Mo not only forms such a protective layers 
but are capable of self repairing oxide films when it is damaged. Hence these are extremely 
passive 
metals. 
If  the  oxide layer forms  on  the  metal surface  is  non-stochiometric, soluble, unstable and 
porous in nature and have an appreciable conductivity, they cannot control corrosion on the 
metal surface for egs: oxide layer formed on metals like Zn, Fe, Mg  etc. 

3.    Anodic and Cathodic area: 

The rate  of  the corrosion is greatly influenced by the relative sizes of cathodic  and anodic 
areas.  If  the  metal  has  smaller the  anodic  area  and  larger  the  cathodic  area  exposed to 
corrosive  atmosphere, more  intense and  faster  is  the  corrosion  occurring  at  anodic  area 
because at  anode  oxidation takes  place and  electrons are  liberated. At the  cathode these 
electrons are consumed. When anode is smaller and cathode region is larger all the liberated 

electrons at  anode are  rapidly consumed. This process  makes the anodic reaction to  takes 
place at  its maximum rate  thus increasing the corrosion  rate. If the cathode is smaller and 
reverse process takes place decrease rate of corrosion.  

For egs: If tin (Sn) coated on iron (Fe) and in that some area are not covered or some  pin holes 
are left, there forms smaller anodic area and larger cathodic area because tin is cathodic with 
respect to iron so intense localized corrosion takes place. On the other hand if Zn coated to 
Fe then if there are some pin holes are there creates larger anodic area and smaller cathodic 
area  because  Fe  is  cathodic  with  respect  to  zinc  so  that  rate  of  corrosion  is  veryless. 
4.    Hydrogen over voltage: 

A  metal  with  low  hydrogen  over  voltage  on  its  surface  is  more  susceptible for 
corrosion. When the  cathodic reaction is hydrogen evolution type with low hydrogen over 
voltage, liberation of H2  gas is more easier so that cathodic reaction is very fast, that makes 
anodic reaction faster hence overall corrosion process is very fast. If the H2  over voltage is 
high so cathodic reaction is slow hence corrosion reaction also slower. 

Corrosion Protection & Prevention: 

In virtually all situations, metal corrosion can be managed, slowed, or even stopped by using 
the proper techniques. Corrosion prevention can take a  number of forms depending on the 
circumstances of the metal being corroded. Corrosion prevention techniques can be generally 
classified into 6 groups: 

1) Environmental Modification 
Corrosion is caused by chemical interactions between metal and gasses in the surrounding 
environment. By  removing  the  metal  from,  or  changing,  the  type  of  environment, metal 
deterioration can be immediately reduced. 

This may  be as  simple as  limiting contact  with rain  or  seawater by storing metal materials 
indoors or could be in the form of direct manipulation of the environment affecting the metal. 

Methods to  reduce the sulfur, chloride, or oxygen content in the surrounding environment 
can  limit the  speed of  metal corrosion.  For  example, feed water  for  water  boilers can  be 
treated with softeners or other chemical media to adjust the hardness, alkalinity or oxygen 
content in order to reduce corrosion on the interior of the unit. 

2)Metal Selection and Surface Conditions 
No  metal  is  immune  to  corrosion  in  all  environments,  but  through  monitoring  and 
understanding the environmental conditions that are the cause of corrosion, changes to  the 
type of metal being used can also lead to significant reductions in corrosion.  

Metal  corrosion  resistance  data  can  be  used  in  combination  with  information  on  the 
environmental conditions to make decisions regarding the suitability of each metal.  

The  development  of  new  alloys,  designed  to  protect  against  corrosion  in  specific 
environments, is  constantly  under  production.  Hastelloy nickel  alloys,  Nirosta steels, and 
Timetal titanium alloys are all examples of alloys designed for corrosion prevention. 

Monitoring of surface conditions is also critical in protecting against metal deterioration from 
corrosion.  Cracks,  crevices  or  asperous  surfaces,  whether  a  result  of  operational 
requirements, wear  and  tear,  or  manufacturing  flaws,  all  can  result  in  greater  rates  of 
corrosion. 

Proper monitoring and the elimination of unnecessarily vulnerable surface conditions, along 
with taking steps to ensure that systems are designed to avoid reactive metal combinations 
and that corrosive agents are not used in the cleaning or maintenance of metal parts are all 
also part of effective corrosion reduction program. 

3)Cathodic Protection 
Galvanic  corrosion  occurs  when  two  different metals are  situated together  in a  corrosive 
electrolyte. 

This a common problem for metals submerged together in seawater, but can also occur when 
two  dissimilar metals  are  immersed in  close  proximity in  moist  soils. For  these  reasons, 
galvanic corrosion often attacks ship hulls, offshore rigs, and oil and gas pipelines. 

Cathodic protection works by converting unwanted anodic (active) sites on a metal's surface 
to  cathodic  (passive) sites through  the  application of  an  opposing  current.  This  opposing 
current supplies free electrons and force local anodes to be polarized to the potential of the 
local cathodes. 

Cathodic protection can take two forms. The first is the introduction of galvanic anodes. This 
method,  known  as  a  sacrificial  system, uses  metal  anodes,  introduced to  the  electrolytic 
environment, to sacrifice themselves (corrode) in order to protect the cathode.  

While the metal needing protection can  vary,  sacrificial anodes are generally made of zinc, 
aluminum, or magnesium, metals that have the most negative electro-potential. The galvanic 
series provides a  comparison of the different electro-potential - or nobility - of metals and 
alloys. 

In a  sacrificial system, metallic ions move from the anode to  the cathode, which leads the 
anode to corrode more quickly than it otherwise would. As a result, the anode must regularly 
be replaced. 

The second method of cathodic protection is referred to as impressed current protection. This 
method, which is often used to protect buried pipelines and ship hulls, requires an alternative 
source of direct electrical current to be supplied to the electrolyte. 

The  negative terminal of  the current  source  is  connected to  the  metal, while the positive 
terminal is attached to an auxiliary anode, which is added to complete the electrical circuit. 

Unlike a  galvanic (sacrificial) anode system, in an impressed current protection system, the 
auxiliary anode is not sacrificed. 

4)Inhibitors 
Corrosion inhibitors are chemicals that  react with the metal's surface or the environmental 
gasses causing corrosion, thereby, interrupting the chemical reaction that causes corrosion. 

Inhibitors can work by adsorbing themselves on the metal's surface and forming a protective 
film. These chemicals can  be applied as a  solution or as  a  protective coating via dispersion 
techniques. 

The inhibitor's process of slowing corrosion depends upon: 

•  Changing the anodic or cathodic polarization behavior 
•  Decreasing the diffusion of ions to the metal's surface 

• 

Increasing the electrical resistance of the metal's surface 

Major  end-use  industries  for  corrosion  inhibitors  are  petroleum  refining,  oil  and  gas 
exploration, chemical  production  and  water  treatment  facilities. The  benefit of  corrosion 
inhibitors is  that  they  can  be  applied in-situ to  metals  as  a  corrective  action  to  counter 
unexpected corrosion. 

5)Coatings 
Paints and other organic coatings are used to protect metals from the degradative effect of 
environmental gasses.  Coatings  are  grouped  by  the  type  of  polymer employed. Common 
organic coatings include: 

•  Alkyd and epoxy ester coatings that, when air dried, promote cross-link oxidation 
•  Two-part urethane coatings 
•  Both acrylic and epoxy polymer radiation curable coatings 
•  Vinyl, acrylic or styrene polymer combination latex coatings 
•  Water-soluble coatings 
•  High-solid coatings 
•  Powder coatings 

6)Plating 
Metallic coatings, or plating, can be applied to inhibit corrosion as well as provide aesthetic, 
decorative finishes. There are four common types of metallic coatings but the common one 
is given below. 

•  Electroplating: A thin layer of metal - often nickel, tin, or chromium - is deposited on 
the substrate  metal (generally steel) in an  electrolytic bath. The  electrolyte usually 
consists of a water solution containing salts of the metal to be deposited. 

Questions:   

1.  Which series ( Galvanic/ Electrochemical) predicts the relative corrosive tendencies of 

a metal? 

2.  Galvanic corrosion is also differential metal corrosion. 
3.  Out of copper, chromium and iron which is unstable and protective? 
4.  State the reason for : wire mesh corrodes faster at the joints./ corrosion occurs in steel 

pipe connected to copper plumbing 

5.  How to prevent corrosion of metals due to moisture? 
6.  Give basic difference between galvanization and tinning. 
7.  soil having more porosity will have high corrosion. 
8.  Hygroscopic suspended particles cause more corrosion. 
9.  Annealing is a useful process. 
10. Smaller the grain size of metal, faster is corrosion. 
11. SO2 and H2S increase corrosion. 
12. L,T and V type joints should be avoided. 
13. Sn undergoes severe corrosion in presence of chlorine but not Ag.  
14. Sn-coated iron articles are free from any damage. 
15. Part of nail inside the wood undergoes corrosion. 
16. Bolts and nuts may be made of same metals. 
17. Deposition of small dust particles on metal surface must be avoided. 
18. Mg sheets are best suited for protection. 
19. Brass containers are not cleaned by alkaline solution. 
20. Justify that corrosion is a diffusion process. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Module  – 4: ENERGY SCIENCE 

A fuel is any combustible material that can be made to react with other substances so that it 
releases energy. 

Types of Fuels: Fuels can be generally classified into two types. 

1.  On the basis of their fuels state/ physical state of aggregation: 

•  Solid Fuels 

•  Liquid Fuels 

•  Gaseous Fuels 

2.  On the basis of their occurrence/ source: 

•  Natural Fuels 

•  Artificial Fuels 

Examples of Fuels: 

Natural Fuels 

Artificial Fuels 

Solid Fuels 

Wood, Coal, Oil Shale 

Tanbark, Bagasse, Straw, Charcoal, Coke Coal, Briquettes 

Liquid Fuels 

Petroleum 

Gaseous Fuels 

Natural Gas 

Oils  from  distillation of  petroleum, Coal  Tar,  LPG,  Shale-Oil, 
Alcohols, etc. 

Coal  gas,  Bio  gas,  CNG  Producer  Gas,  Water  Gas,  Hydrogen, 
Acetylene, Blast Furnace Gas, Oil Gas 

 
Solid Fuels 

Advantages: 

•  Easier transportation and storage. 

•  Low production cost. 

•  Moderate ignition temperature. 

Disadvantages: 

•  Large portion of energy is wasted. 

•  Cost of handling is high and controlling is also hard. 

•  Ash content is high & burn with clinker formation. 

Liquid Fuels: 

Advantages: 

•  Higher calorific value per unit mass. 

•  Burn without ash, clinkers, etc. 

•  Controlling the combustion is easier. 

•  Transportation easier through pipes and stored indefinitely without loss.  

•  Loss of energy is comparatively lower. 

•  Require less furnace space for combustion. 

Disadvantages: 

•  Cost of liquid fuel is much higher compared to solid fuel. 

•  Storage methods are costlier. 

•  Greater risk of fire hazards. 

•  Special burning equipment required for more efficient combustion. 

Gaseous Fuels: 

Advantages: 

•  Transportation through pipes is easy. 

•  Sparking combustion is really easy. 

•  They have a higher heat content. 

•  Clean after use. 

•  Do not require any special burner technology. 

Disadvantages: 

•  Large storage tanks required. 

•  As they are  highly inflammable, the chance  for fire hazards  are extremely high and 

strict safety measures need to be followed. 

Fossil Fuel: 

Fossil fuels are  the  dead  and  decayed remains  of  plants  and  animals subjected to 
decades  of  pressure  and  temperature  under  the  earth’s  crust.  Primarily  fossil fuels  are 
hydrocarbons. They are convenient and effective. They provide the calorific value required to 
fulfill our needs. Even though they are available in plenty right now, they are a non -renewable 
source of energy. The burning of fossil fuels is responsible for a large section of the world’s 
pollution index. 

Types of fossil fuels: 

•  Coal 

•  Oil 

•  Natural Gas 

Characteristics  of a good fuel    

1)  High calorific value   2) Moderate ignition temp as low temp can  cause fire hazard where 
as  high value  makes  it  difficult to  ignite.3) low  moisture content  4)  low  non -combustible 
matter. Other factors include moderate rate of combustion, low cost, uniform size.  

calorific value (plural calorific values): 

 The amount of energy produced by the complete combustion of a material or fuel. Measured 
in units of energy per amount of material, e.g. kJ/kg. The amount of energy available from an 
item of  food when  digested, mostly  from  carbohydrates  and  fats.  The  calorific  value is  a 
characteristic for each substance. It is measured in units of energy per unit of the substance, 
usually mass, such as: kcal/kg, kJ/kg, J/mol, Btu/m³. Heating value is commonly determined 
by use of a bomb calorimeter. 

1 calorie---  Heat required to increase temp. of 1gm of water through 10c. 

1 B.Th. U---- Amount of heat reqd. to raise temp of 1 pound of water through 10F. 

Centrigrade Heat Unit----Quanty of heat required to raise temp. of 1 pound of water through 
10c. 

1 Kcal =39.68  B.Th.U =2.2C.H.U 

HCV: 

HCV is the amount of heat or energy liberated from the combustion of a fuel when its 
byproducts are condensed to recover some of the energy released from the combustion. In 
comparison, LCV is the amount of energy liberated from the combustion of a fuel when its 
byproducts freely escape. During the use of any fuel, water vapors and moisture etc. escape 
as such along with the combustion gases. As they are not condensed, a lower amount of heat 
is available. 

LCV = HCV- Latent  heat of vapors formed 

Since 1 part by mass of hydrogen produces 9 parts by mass of water. 

Hence, LCV= HCV— mass of H2 × Latent heat of steam 

Latent heat of steam = 587Kcal/Kg or 1060  B.T.U/lb 

Unit Conversion:  1Kcal/Kg = 1.8 B. T .U 

1Kcal/ m3 = 0.1077   B.T.U/ft3 

1B.T.U/ft3  = 9.3 K cal/ m3 

Calculation  If oxygen is present in the fuel, it is in the combination with H2 as fixed hydrogen 
(H2O).  2H2 +O2  → 2H2O 

8 parts of O2combine with1 part of H2. 

Fixed hydrogen = mass of oxygen in fuel/ 8 

Amount of H2 available for combustion =Total mass of H2 in the  fuel – fixed H2 =(H-O/8) 

 H2O  formed from 1 gm of H2  = 9 gm 

H2O formed from H/100  gm of H2  = 9X H/100  gm = 0.09H  gm 

Latent Heat of steam = 587  cal/gm, Latent heat of water vapour = 0.09H  X 587  cal/gm.  

LCV = HCV-0.09X587  cal/gm 

Theoretical Calculation of calorific value of a fuel: 

Calorific value of a fuel is the sum of the calorific value of all components present.  

Constituent              Hydrogen           Carbon           

Sulphur 

HCV(Kcal/Kg)            34,500 

8080 

2420 

Dulong’s Formula  :   HCV = 1/100[8080C  +34500(H-O/8)  +2240S]  Kcal/kg 

Calorific value of Fuels: 

Wood  -  2500  kcal/kg 

CNG--  4900  kcal/m3 

Producer gas-   2800  kcal/m3 

Natural gas---12000  kcal/kg 

LPG—27800  kcal/kg 

Kerosene—11100 kcal/kg 

Diesel-  11000  kcal/kg 

Petrol—11250  kcal/kg 

Electricity--- 860 kcal/kwh 

Fractional distillation of crude oil: 

Fractional distillation separates a mixture into a number of different parts, called fractions. 

A tall fractionating column is fitted above the mixture, with several condensers coming off at 
different heights. The  column  is  hot  at  the  bottom  and  cool  at  the  top.  Substances  with 
high boiling  points condense at  the  bottom  and  substances  with  lower  boiling  points 
condense on the way to the top. 

Crude oil is a mixture of hydrocarbons. The crude oil is evaporated and its vapours condense 
at  different  temperatures 
fraction  contains 
hydrocarbon molecules with a similar number of carbon atoms and a similar range of boiling 
points. 

fractionating  column.  Each 

the 

in 

 
 
 
Oil fractions: 

The diagram below summarizes the main fractions from crude oil and their uses, and 
the  trends  in properties. Note  that  the gases  leave  at  the  top  of  the  column,  the liquids 
condense in the middle and the solids stay at the bottom. 

The fractionating column 
As we go up the fractionating column, the hydrocarbons have: 

1.  lower boiling points 

2.  lower viscosity (they flow more easily) 

3.  higher flammability (they ignite more easily). 

The  various  components  of  crude  oil  have  different  sizes,  weights  and  boiling 
temperatures; so, the first step is to separate these components. Because they have different 
boiling temperatures, they can be separated easily by a process called fractional distillation. 
The steps of fractional distillation are as follows: 

1.  You heat the mixture of two or more substances (liquids) with different boiling points 
to  a  high  temperature.  Heating  is  usually  done  with  high  pressure  steam  to 
temperatures of about 1112  degrees Fahrenheit / 600  degrees Celsius. 

2.  The mixture boils, forming vapor (gases); most substances go into the vapor phase . 

3.  The vapor enters the bottom of a long column (fractional distillation column) that is 
filled with trays or plates. The trays have many holes or bubble caps (like a loosened 
cap  on a soda bottle) in them to allow the vapor to pass through. They increase the 
contact  time between the vapor  and  the  liquids in  the  column and help to  collect 
liquids that form at  various heights in the column. There is a temperature difference 
across the column (hot at the bottom, cool at the top). 

4.  The vapor rises in the column. 

5.  As the vapor rises through the trays in the column, it cools. 

6.  When a substance in the vapor reaches a height where the temperature of the column 
is  equal  to  that  substance's  boiling  point,  it  will  condense to  form  a  liquid. (The 
substance  with  the  lowest  boiling point will condense  at  the  highest  point  in  the 
column; substances with higher boiling points will condense lower in the column.).  

7.  The trays collect the various liquid fractions. 

8.  The collected liquid fractions may pass to condensers, which cool them further, and 
then go to storage tanks, or they may go to other areas for further chemical processing 

Fractional distillation is useful for separating a mixture of substances with narrow differences 
in boiling points, and is the most important step in the refining process. 

Before fractional distillation, water is separated by Cottrell’s process which allows the oil to 
flow between two highly charged electrodes. The colloidal water-droplets coalesce to form a 
large  drop,  which  separate  out.  Similarly,  harmful  ‘S’  compounds  can  be  removed  by 
treatment with copper oxide to give solid copper sulphide that is filtered out. 

 
Diesel            

Cheaper,  less  consumption  per  unit  power  produced,  Thermal  efficiency higher, 

Exhaust gases contain less pollutants( CO2, Hydrocarbon), Expensive fuel injection device 

Petrol  costilier, more consumption., lower thermal efficiency, Emit higher pollutants, simple 
IC engine 

Refining  of  gasoline:    Very  much  necessary  as  it  contains  some  undesirable unsaturated 
hydrocarbons and sulphur compounds. The former gets oxidized & polymerized, thus causing 
gums & sludge formation on storing. Sulphur compounds corrode IC engines.  

Process:      Sulphur compounds  are  generally removed by  treating with alkaline solution of 
sodium plumbite with controlled addition of  sulphur. This  process is called ‘Sweetening of 
petrol’ .Final conversion is known as ‘Doctor’s Process’. 

2RSH + Na2Pbo2  →  Pb(SR)2  +2NaOH 

Pb(SR)2  →PbSs + RSSR 

The disulphides are extracted with a suitable solvent. 

Olefins & colouring matters of gasoline are removed  by percolating gasoline through Fuller’s  
earth , which adsorbs the other olefins & colours.  After refining, some inhibitors are added. 
These retard oxidation process thereby improving the storing. 

Cracking of petrol: 

Cracking,  in petroleum refining, is   the process by which heavy hydrocarbon  molecules are 
broken  up  into  lighter molecules by  means  of  heat  and  usually  pressure and  sometimes 
catalysts. Cracking is the most important process for the commercial production of gasoline 
and diesel fuel. 

C10H22  → C5H12   +     C5H10 

Decane 

    n-pentane 

pentene 

Types of Cracking  

Thermal Cracking and Catalytic Cracking. Cracking  is a process by which complex high 
molecular weight organic compounds are broken down into smaller fragments of molecules. 
The  complex  high  molecular  weight  organic  compounds  are  generally  long  chained 
hydrocarbons  such  as  petroleum. Thermal  is further  divided in  to  liquid  &  vapour  phase. 
Catalytic is of fixed bed & moving bed. 

Thermal cracking:   No catalyst used heavy oils are subjected to high temp & pressure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Characteristics 

Liquid Phase 

Vapour phase  

Cracking temp  

Pressure 

Yield of petrol  

Octane rating   

Time reqd.        

475-5300c 
100  kg/cm2 

50-60  % 

65-70 

600-630
10-20  KG/ cm2 

> 60%   

> 70 

More 

less 

Catalytic  Cracking:    Much  lower temp& pressure  than  thermal/ Suitable catalyst used are 
Al2O3,  Al2 ( SiO3)3,  Better yield & quality, a  low  pressure  reqd / no undesired product    as 
majority escapes  as  H2S      /  product  with high  octane  rating/  use of  selective catalyst/ no 
external fuel needed as fuel comes from coal embedded in catalyst. 

Knocking: 

In an internal-combustion engine, sharp sounds caused by premature combustion of 
part of the compressed air-fuel mixture in the cylinder. In a properly functioning engine, the 
charge burns with the flame front progressing smoothly from the point of ignition across the 
combustion chamber. However, at high compression ratios, depending on the composition of 
the fuel, some of the charge may spontaneously ignite ahead of the flame front and burn in 
an uncontrolled manner, producing intense high-frequency pressure waves. These pressure 
waves force parts  of the engine to vibrate, which produces an audible knock.  Compression 
ratio (CR) is the ratio of gaseous volume(V1) in the cylinder at the end of the suction-stroke 
to the volume(V2) at the end of compression –stroke of the piston. 

As  V2 <  V1,  CR  =  V1/V2  >  1.  The ‘CR’ at which the fuel tends to  knock is known as  ‘critical 
compression ratio’. 

Consequences: 

Knocking can  cause overheating of the spark-plug points, erosion of the combustion 
chamber  surface, and  rough,  inefficient operation. It  can  be  avoided by  adjusting  certain 
variables of engine design and operation, such as compression ratio and  burning time; but 
the  most  common  method  is  to  burn  gasoline  of  higher octane  number.  Higher 
the octane number, the more compression from the piston the gasoline can withstand before 
igniting  in  the  engine.  The  ability  for  gasoline  to  withstand  being  compressed  is 
most important  for vehicles that run on traditional gasoline. 

The octane  number of  gasoline  is  a  measure  of  its  resistance  to  knock.  The  octane 
number is determined by  comparing  the  characteristics  of  a  gasoline to  isooctane  (2,2,4-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that 

compound 

trimethylpentane) and heptane. Isooctane is assigned an octane number of 100. It is a highly 
branched 
knock. 
Octanerating canbe improved with octane boosters  such  as  ethanol,  di  ethyl    Telluride 
,methanol, MTBE, ETBE (all oxygenated and somewhat safe) or other chemicals. In the past it 
was usually TEL  (lead based, which were banned in the mid-70's since they're toxic and also 
destroyed the car's catalytic converters).  

smoothly, 

burns 

little 

with 

Tetra  ethyl Lead:   (C2H5)2pb  forms  Pb  and  PbO  particles which  react  as  chain  reaction 
inhibitors by  slowing  down  the  chain  oxidation reaction  responsible for  early  detonation 
leading to knocking  sound. 

1)Presence of ‘S’ reduces the efficiency of TEL . So, desulphurised Gasoline is used.  

2) Pb & PbO2 decrease engine life so these are removed as follows, Pb + C2H4Br2  → PbBr2 + 
C2H4,     PbBr2 is volatile so escapes along with exhaust gas. 

3) Another cause of pollution is incomplete combustion leading to the formation of CO X, NOX 
etc. Hence catalytic convertors based on Pt are employed to carry  out catalytic combustion 
reaction.  But  lead  present  in  exhaust  gas  poisons  active  sites  in  the  catalyst.  Catalytic 
converter  is a Pt or Rh based compound which helps to convert more poisonous CO to CO 2. 

CO →   CO2.  But Pt is poisoned  by Pb, hence the need for unleaded petrol. 

MTBE : It is preferred as it contains oxygen in the form of ether group and supplies oxygen for 
combustion there by  reducing the formation of  peroxy compound. Its  advantage is  that  it 
permits use of catalytic converter. 

Octane numbers: 

o  The octane number of a fuel is based on how fuels auto ignite, under compression. 
o 

It is based on the scale where isooctane is 100  (minimal ignition under pressure) and 
heptane is 0 (easily ignites under pressure). 

o  For example, a petrol with an octane number of 92  has the same knock as a mixture 

of 92% isooctane and 8% heptane. 

o  Octane rating decreases with an increase in the carbon chain length. 
o  Octane ratings increase with carbon chain branching. 
o  Octane ratings increase in aromatics with same number of carbons. 
o 

It is important to know octane numbers for petrol because the auto ignition of fuels 
causes a knocking effect in petrol engines. This is where it ignites twice; once due to 
the high  pressure and  again  when the spark  ignites the  petrol. This causes  the  car 
engine to be less efficient and it can also damage the engine. 

o  However, diesel engines rely on this knocking effect, as they have no spark plugs and 

rely on the effect of compression to make their fuel/air mixtures ignite. 

o  Octane rating order  is given in decreasing order as: 

n-alkanes  >  mono  substituted  alkanes>  cyclic  alkanes  >  alkenes  >  alkenes >  poly 
substituted alkenes > aromatics. 

Similarly for straight chain hydrocarbons, n-hexane > n-pentane > n-butane 

‘Octane Rating’ was introduced by Graham  Edger in 1872  which gave n-heptane with 
zero with iso octane 100.  The best gasoline known as 80-octane fuel is having 80:20 
combination of iso octane & n-heptane. 

How octane rating of a fuel can be increased? 

o  There are  two  ways to  increase the octane  number of a  fuel. One is to  put  special 
additives into the fuel which discourage auto ignition, and the other is to blend high -
octane fuels in with the ordinary petrol. 

The right kind of alkane: 

o  The best kind of alkane for fuels is not the most plentiful in crude oil.  
o  The shorter the alkane chain, the higher the octane number. However, the volatility 

of the hydrocarbon increases with a decrease in the chain length. 

o  The short alkane chains have to be mixed in petrol to lower their volatility and higher 

the octane number of the petrol. 

o  The  other  factor  that  affects  the octane  number  is the  degree of branching  in  the 

alkane chain. The more branched the alkane is, the higher the octane number.  

o  Crude oil contains both straight-chain and branched alkanes, but it does not contain 

enough branched alkanes to give it a high octane number. 

o  But this can be solved by  increasing the octane numbers by isomerism, reforming and 

cracking. 

Isomerism 

o 

Isomerization involves heating up straight chained alkanes in the presence of suitable 
catalysts, so that the chains break. 

o  When the chains join together again, they are more likely to be branched. 

o  Oil refineries do this on a large scale with C6H14 and C5H12. 
o  The  isomerization  reaction  is  reversible  and  higher  temperatures 
favour  the  production  of  straight  chained  isomers.  However  the 
temperature cannot be too low or  the reaction would take too long, 
so  a  compromise  is  made  between yield and  rate  of  reaction.  The 
temperature used is 250oC. 

o  The catalyst involved in the isomerization is platinum; the products are then passed 
over a form of zeolite, which acts as a molecular sieve, separating the straight chains 
from the branched chains. 

Cetane Number OR  Rating: 

It  is a  measure  of  the  ignition  value  of  a  diesel fuel  that  represents  the  percentage  by 
volume of cetane( Hexadecane,C16H34  ) in a mixture of liquid methylnaphthalene that gives 
the same ignition lag as the oil being tested. 

 Cetane  is a  colorless, liquid hydrocarbon  (a  molecule from  the  alkane series) that  ignites 
easily under compression. For  this reason, it was given a  base rating of 100  and is used as 
the standard measure of the performance of compression ignition fuels, such as diesel and 
biodiesel. All the sundry hydrocarbon constituents of diesel fuel are measured and indexed 
against cetane's base-100 rating.      

Cetane rating  is given as:                 n-alkane  >  napthalenes  >  alkenes  >  branched  alkanes      > 
aromatics 

From  Left to Right:    Ignition delay increases,   Ignition quality decreases,    Cetane number 
decreases 

Cetane Number (Significance) 

Similar to the octane number rating that's applied to gasoline to rate its ignition stability, the 
cetane  number  is  the  rating  assigned  to  diesel fuel to  rate  its  combustion quality.  While 
gasoline's octane number signifies its ability to resist auto-ignition (also referred to as  pre-
ignition, knocking, pinging, or detonation), diesel's cetane number is a measure of the fuel's 
delay of ignition time (the amount of time between the injection of fuel into the combustion 
chamber and the actual start of combustion of the fuel charge). 

Because diesel engines rely on compression ignition (no spark), the fuel must be able to auto-
ignite—and generally, the  quicker  the  better.  A  higher  cetane  numbe r  means  a  shorter 
ignition delay time and  more  complete combustion of  the  fuel charge  in  the  combustion 
chamber.  This,  of  course,  translates  into  a  smoother  running,  better  performing  engine.  
Cetane number requirements depend mainly on engine design, size , speed of operation, and 

load variations—and to a slightly lesser extent, atmospheric conditions. Conversely, running 
a diesel engine on fuel with a lower-than-recommended cetane number can result in rough 
operation (noise and vibration), low power output, excessive deposits and wear, and hard 
starting. 

Cetane Numbers of Various Diesel Fuels: 

Normal modern highway diesel engines run best with a fuel rated between 45 and 55. The 
following list of cetane numbers denotes varying grades and  types of  compression ignition 
diesel fuels: 

•  Regular diesel: 48 
•  Premium diesel: 55 
•  Biodiesel (B100): 55 
•  Biodiesel blend (B20): 50 
•  Synthetic diesel: 55 
•  Commonly High speed diesel( 45-60), Low speed(~25). 

Additives to raise cetane  number  :    Alkyl nitrates (principally 2-ethylhexyl nitrate) and di-
tert-butyl peroxide , acetone peroxide are used as additives to raise the cetane number. 

Liquid Fuels: 

LPG:    It  is  obtained  as  a  by  product  during  cracking  of  heavy  oils  or  natural  gas.  It  is 
dehydrated, desulphurised & traces of odorous organic  sulphides (Mercaptans) is added to 
give warnings of gas leak. LPG is supplied under  pressure in containers  under various trade 
name. Its calorific value is 27,800  Kcal/m3. It consists of hydrocarbons of such volatility so that 
it can exist as gas under atmospheric pressure but can also be easily liquefied under pressure. 
Mainly consists of n-butane,, isobutene, butylenes and propane with little or no amount  of 
ethane and propylene. 

Advantages  over  Gasoline:  High  knock-resistant,  cheaper,  burns  cleanly  where  as 
disadvantages  include its handling only under pressure with not being easily detectable.  

Non-Petroleum Fuels:  Mostly used as an alternative fuel. 

Power Alcohol : Fuel containing 25%  ethanol. 

C12H22O11 +  H2O   → C6H12O6  + C6H12O6 (In presence of Invertase) 

C6H12O6  →  2C2H5OH + 2CO2(In presence of Zymase) 

The  above  process  takes  36  to  38  hours  for  complete  fermentation.  The  fermented 
liquid(WASH) contains about  18-20%  alcohol. The  wash is  then fractionally distilled  to get 

“Rectified  Spirit”(90-95%  alcohol).  To  get  absolute  alcohol(100  %),  the  rectified spirit  is 
digested with lime for 2 days and distilled. 

Natural Gases:    It is called ‘Wet Gas’ and  it is processed   to remove  propane, propene, 
butane  and  butane.  When  the  gas  is  associated  with  crude  oil,  it  is  called  ‘dry  gas’. 
Approximate component of natural gas: CH4 = 70%, C2H6 =  5-10%, H2 =3%,(CO + CO2) = Rest,   
calorific value  =  12000-14000  kcal/ m3 or (12500  kcal/kg.) 

CNG :    A natural gas compressed to a high pressure of about 1000  atm  Say a steel cylinder 
containing 15  kg  of CNG contains 2x104  or 20m3of natural gas at 1 atm. pressure. It is a good 
substitute  for petrol or diesel as it gives no sulphur or nitrogen during combustion and no 
carbon particles. 

Coal Gas:     When coal is carbonized or heated in the absence of air at about 13000c,  we get 
coal gas. 

Coal    →  coke  + coal gas  

Properties:    It is a colourless gas having a characteristic odour. It is lighter than air and burns 
with a long smoky flame. Avg. composition: H2 =40%, CH4 = 32%, CO =7%, C2H2=2%, C2H4 =4%, 
N2 =4%, CO2=1% and rest =4%. Calorific value = 4,900Kcal/  m3 

Uses; As a fuel/ In metallurgical operations for providing reducing atmosphere.  

Oil Gas :   Prepared by cracking of Kerosene oil in a coal-fixed furnace. 

C12H26    → CH4+ C2H6+C2H2+  C2H4+ C3H8 

Calorific value is 4500-5400  Kcal/ m3. It is used as a laboratory gas with the composition, CH4 
=25-30%,  H2=50-55%,  CO= 10-20%,  CO2 = 3% 

Producer Gas:    A mixture of combustible gases (CO + NO2) associated with  a large amount 
of non-combustible gases like N2, CO2. 

It is prepared bypassing air mixed with a little of steam over a red hot coal bed maintained at 
about 10000c  in a special reactor, called ‘Gas  

Producer’. Calorific value =1300  Kcal/m3, Avg. composition ;  CO =22.3%, H2 =8.12%, N2= 52%, 
CO2 =3%. 

Uses:    Useful for  heating in  a  furnace, muffle furnace,  ,  retorts  or  as  a  reducing  agent  in 
metallurgical operation. 

Water  Gas:    A  mixture  of  combustible  gases(  CO2+  H2)  with  a  little  amount  of  non-
combustible gases like CO2 and N2. It is produced by passing alternatively steam and little air 
through a bed  of red hot coal/ coke maintained at about 900-10000C  in a reactor. 

C  +H2O → CO + H2    -29Kcal/mole 

Calorific Value  = 2800   Kcal/m3 

Avg. composition : H2= 51%, CO=41%,  N2 =4%, CO2 = 4% 

Uses;  A source of H2, an illuminating gas, as a fuel  also known as ‘Blue Gas’  

Synthetic Fuel:  A liquid or a gaseous fuel obtained from syn gas ( a mixture of CO & H2) where 
as Syn gas is derived from gasification of coal gas or biomass. 

BATTERY SCIENCE: 

A battery is  a  device  consisting of  one  or  more electrochemical cells with  external 
connections for  powering electrical devices such  as flashlights, mobile phones, and electric 
cars.  When a battery is supplying electric power, its positive terminal is the cathode and its 
negative terminal is the anode.  The terminal marked negative is the source of electrons that 
will flow  through  an  external electric  circuit  to  the  positive terminal. When  a  battery  is 
connected to  an  external electric load,  a redox reaction  converts  high-energy reactants  to 
lower-energy products, and the free-energy difference is delivered to the external circuit as 
electrical energy.  

Primary (single-use  or  "disposable")  batteries  are  used  once  and  discarded,  as 
the electrode materials  are  irreversibly changed  during  discharge;  a  common  example  is 
flashlights  and  a  multitude  of  portable  electronic 
the alkaline  battery used 
devices. Secondary  (rechargeable)  batteries can  discharge  and  recharged  multiple  times 
using an applied electric current; the original composition of the electrodes can be restored 
by  reverse current.  Examples include the lead-acid batteries used  in  vehicles and lithium-
ion batteries used for portable electronics such as laptops and mobile phones. 

for 

DRY CELL: 

Dry  cell or Leclanche  cell is  a  primary cell having  a  zinc  anode,  a  carbon  (graphite) 
cathode surrounded by manganese dioxide, and a  paste containing ammonium chloride as 
electrolyte. The  electromotive force  (emf) produced  by  a dry  cell is  1.5  V. Dry  cell is  not 
reversible and therefore have a limited life time.  Dry cell batterie s create electrical energy by 
converting chemical energy into electricity. These materials are placed within the electrolyte 
paste within the battery. They react with each other through a chemical process in which the 
electrolyte (carbon or  manganese dioxide) reacts with the zinc, creating electricity perating 
life. 

Advantages of Leclanche’ Battery 

1.  The cost of this battery cell is quite low. 
2.  Various shapes, sizes and capacities of these cells are easily available. 
3.  Long traditional reliability. 
Disadvantages of Leclanche’ Battery 

1.  Its energy density is quite low. 
2.  It gives poor service in low temperature. 
3.  It has poor leakage resistance. 
4.  Cannot perform efficiently at high current drain application. 
5.  Self-life is not very good. 
6.  Its voltage falls steadily with discharge. 

The overall reaction occurring in the dry cell produces 1.5  volts:             

anode 

  Zn(s) 

  Zn2+(aq) 

+  2e– 

cathode    2 e– 

+  2NH4

+(aq) 

  2 NH3(g) 

+  H2(g) 

  2 NH3(g) 

+  Zn+2 (aq) 

  [Zn(NH3)2]2+(aq)   

  H2(g) 

+  2 MnO2(s) 

  Mn2O3(s) 

+  H2O(l) 

Zn(s) 

+  2NH4

+(aq)  +  2 MnO2(s) 

  [Zn(NH3)2]2+(aq)  +  Mn2O3(s)  +  H2O(l) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WET CELL BATTERY: 

There  are  huge  chemical  process  is  involved  in  Lead  Acid  battery’s  charging  and 
discharging condition. The diluted sulfuric acid H2SO4  molecules break into two parts when 
the acid dissolves. It will create positive ions 2H+ and negative ions SO4-. As we told before, 
two electrodes are connected as plates, Anode and Cathode. Anode catches the negative ions 
and cathode attracts the positive ions. This bonding in Anode and SO4- and Cathode with 2H+ 
interchange electrons and  which is  further react  with the H2O  or  with the water  (Diluted 
sulfuric acid, Sulfuric Acid + Water). 

The battery has two states of chemical reaction, Charging and Discharging. 

Discharging  of  a  lead  acid  battery is  again  involved with  chemical  reactions.  The 
sulfuric acid is in the diluted form with typically 3:1  ratio with water and sulfuric acid. When 
the loads are connected across the plates, the sulfuric acid again breaks into positive ions 2H+ 
and  negative ions SO4.  The  hydrogen ions react  with the  PbO2 and  make PbO  and  water 
H2O.  PbO start reacting with the H2SO4  and creates PbSO4 and H2O. 

On the other side SO4- ions exchange electrons from Pb, creating radical SO4 which further 
creates PbSO4 reacting with the Pb. 

As explained above, following chemical reactions takes place at  Anode and Cathode during 
the discharging process. These reactions are exactly opposite of charging reactions: 

At cathode 

Pb + SO4

2- => PbSO4 + 2e- 

At anode: 

 
PbO2 + SO4

2- + 4H- + 2e- => PbSO4 + 2H2O 

Combining above two equation, the overall chemical reaction will be 

PbO2 + Pb + 2H2SO4 =>  2PbSO4 + 2H2O 

Charging Reactions: 

When the battery is connected with the charger, the sulfuric acid molecules break into 
two ions, positive ions 2H+  and  negative ions SO4-.  The hydrogen exchange electrons with 
the cathode and become hydrogen, this hydrogen reacts with the PbSO4 in cathode and form 
Sulfuric Acid (H2SO4) and Lead (Pb). On the other hand, SO4- exchange electrons with anode 
and become radical SO4.  This SO4 reacts with PbSO4 of anode and create the lead peroxide 
PbO2 and sulfuric acid (H2SO4).  The energy gets stored by increasing the gravity of sulfuric 
acid and increasing the cell potential voltage. 

As explained above, following chemical reactions takes place at  Anode and Cathode during 
the charging process. 

At cathode 

PbSO4 + 2e- => Pb + SO4

2- 

At anode 

PbSO4 + 2H2O  => PbO2 + SO4

2- + 4H- + 2e- 

Combining above two equation, the overall chemical reaction will be  

2PbSO4 + 2H2O  => PbO2 + Pb + 2H2SO4   

Lead-acid battery maintenance rules 

1.  Watering is  the most neglected maintenance feature of  flooded lead-acid batteries. As 
overcharging  decreases  water,  we  need  to  check  it  frequently.  Less  water  creates 
oxidation in plates and decreases the lifespan of the battery. Add distilled or ionized water 
when needed. 

2.  Check for the vents, they need to be perfected with rubber caps,  often the rubber caps 

sticks with the holes too tightly. 

3.  Recharge  lead-acid batteries after each  use. A long period without recharging provides 

sulfating in the plates. 

4.  Do not freeze the battery or  charge it more than  49-degree centigrade. In cold ambient 
batteries need to be fully charged as fully charge batteries safer than the empty batteries 
in respect of freezing. 

5.  Do not deep discharge the battery less than 1.7V per cell. 
6.  To store a lead acid battery, it needs to be completely charged then the electrolyte needs 
to be drained. Then the battery will become dry and can be stored for a long time period. 

FUEL CELL: 
Hydrogen + Oxygen = Electricity + Water Vapor 

Cathode: O2 + 4H+  + 4e– → 2H2O 
Anode: 2H2  → 4H+ + 4e– 
Overall: 2H2  + O2 → 2H2O 

A fuel cell is a device that converts chemical potential energy (energy stored in molecular 
bonds) into electrical energy. A PEM  (Proton Exchange Membrane)  cell uses hydrogen gas 
(H2) and oxygen gas (O2) as fuel. The products of the reaction in the cell are water, electricity, 

 
 
 
 
and heat. This is a  big improvement over internal combustion engines, coal burning power 
plants, and nuclear power plants, all of which produce harmful by-products. 

Since O2 is readily available in the  atmosphere, we  only need to  supply  the fuel cell with 
H2 which can come from an electrolysis process (see Alkaline electrolysis or PEM electrolysis). 

There are four basic elements of a PEM Fuel Cell: 

The anode, the negative post of the fuel cell, has several jobs. It conducts the electrons that 
are freed from the hydrogen molecules so that they can be used in an external circuit. It has 
channels etched into it that disperse the hydrogen gas equally over the surface of the catalyst. 

The cathode, the positive post of the fuel cell, has channels etched into it that distribute the 
oxygen to the surface of the catalyst. It  also conducts  the electrons back from the external 
circuit to the catalyst, where they can recombine with the hydrogen ions and oxygen to form 
water. 

As the name implies, the heart of the cell is the proton exchange membrane. It allows protons 
to pass through it virtually unimpeded, while electrons are blocked. So, when the H 2 hits the 
catalyst and splits into protons and electrons (remember, a proton is the same as  an H+ ion) 
the protons go directly through to the cathode side, while the electrons are forced to travel 
through an  external circuit. Along the way they perform useful work, like lighting a bulb or 
driving a  motor,  before combining with the  protons  and  O 2 on  the other  side to  produce 
water. 

WORKING:  

Pressurized hydrogen  gas  (H2)  entering the  fuel cell on  the  anode  side. This gas  i s 
forced through the catalyst by the pressure. When an H2 molecule comes in contact with the 
platinum on the catalyst, it splits into two H+  ions and two electrons (e-). The electrons are 
conducted through the anode, where they make their way through the external circuit (doing 
useful work such as turning a motor) and return to the cathode side of the fuel cell.  

Meanwhile, on the cathode side of the fuel cell, oxygen gas (O2) is being forced through the 
catalyst, where it forms two oxygen atoms. Each of these atoms has a strong negative charge. 
This negative charge attracts  the two H+  ions through the membrane, where they combine 
with an  oxygen atom  and  two  of  the  electrons from  the  external circuit  to  form  a  water 
molecule (H2O). 

Due to  the  high energetic content of  hydrogen and  high efficiency of fuel cells (55%),  this 
great  technology  can  be  used  in  many  applications  like  transport  (cars,  buses,  forklifts, 
etc)  and backup power to produce electricity during a failure of the electricity grid.  

Advantages of the technology: 

•  By converting chemical potential energy directly into electrical energy, fuel cells avoid 
the “thermal bottleneck” (a consequence of the 2nd law of thermodynamics) and are 
thus inherently more efficient than combus 

•  By converting chemical potential energy directly into electrical energy, fuel cells avoid 
the “thermal bottleneck” (a consequence of the 2nd law of thermodynamics) and are 
thus  inherently more  efficient than  combustion  engines, which  must  first convert 
chemical potential energy into heat, and then mechanical work. 

•  Direct emissions from a fuel cell vehicle are just water and a little heat. This is a huge 
improvement over the internal combustion engine’s litany of greenhouse gases.  
•  Fuel cells have no moving parts.  They are  thus much  more reliable than traditional 

engines. 

•  Hydrogen can be produced in an environmentally friendly manner, while oil extraction 

and refining is very damaging. 

 
 
 
 
Module  – 5: NANOMATERIALS  AND 
NANOCHEMISTRY 

It deals with the chemical application of nano materials  along with their synthesis and 
characterization. Nano materials are mostly in the range  of 10-9  m . Ex) Head of a pin---  106 
nm. 

Effect of size on material properties : 

Property changes at nano scale wrt phisio-chemical, optical ,electrical and magnetic behavior. 

1)  Au nps   change  their colour  by changing their size. 5  nm- red, 60nm    -pink, 90  nm-

violet. 

2)  A drop of water (5 nm ) boils at 95.90c   compared to normal water. 
3)  Adhesive property  increases by decreasing the size as surface area increases. 
4)  Anti bacterial property increases as size decreases. 
5)  Optical properties of nps  are dependent on size. 

All these changes in nps compared to the bulk materials are due to a large s/v ratio which is 
given by, 

S/V   = 4∏r2/ 4/3∏r3  =3/r 

Materials with high s/v    value possess very small diameter, porous and  react  with a  much 
faster rate. Extra chemical reactivity is due to this high S/ V ratio. 
Synthesis  of  nano  materials    :    Two  common  methods followed are 1)  Top- down  and  2) 
Bottom –up approach. 
 Top-down Approach  :  It is a solid-state process involving size reduction from bulk materials. 
It mostly follows physical processes like crushing and grinding, milling. 
Limitations  :   A  slow process but not suitable for large scale applications/ leads to various 
defects  and  imperfections on  the  surface/  particles  of  uniform  size and  morphology  not 
formed/ 
Some well known processes are electro-explosion, scattering, laser absorption 
Bottom-up Approach.: It is purely a  build-up one in which  atom-by atom, molecule-molecule 
or  cluster-cluster  combination  is  made.  Some  of  these  are  :  sol -gel, chemical  reduction, 
combustion, chemical vapor deposition, microwave synthesis etc. It also includes Green route 
which takes the help of sources like plants, yeast, fungi, bacteria etc. 
 Advantages:   Generates particles of uniform size, shape, morphology./ particles of excellent 
quality and quantity/ an environmental friendly process 
Advantages of plant extract: 
Produces  much less toxic waste/ act as both reducing and capping agent/ a safe process/ nps 
obtained have excellent medicinal properties. 

 
 
Preparation of NPS : 
The three raw materials needed are given below. 

1)  Precursor salt ; AgNO3, AuCl3, ZnSO4,CuSO4 etc. 
2)  Reducing Agent : citric acid, H2O2, Hydrazine. These are mostly phyto chemicals, plant 
metabolic, polyphenols. 
3)  Stabilizing agents : Also known as capping agents these are mostly polymers like PVA, 
PVP, surfactants. 

The reducing agent provides electrons where as the capping agent makes the mixing process 
complete and faster. 
Synthesis and characterization of gold nps : 
IMP)    It  is an  environment friendly, low-cost and  effective process. The  phyto  chemicals ( 
Alkaloids, flavonoids) present in plant extract can act both as capping and reducing agent. 

Synthesis:  It is a bio reduction process in which leaves of Papaya and Tulasi are cut into small 
pieces. 10 gm of such leaves taken in a beaker with 200ml of distilled water was boiled for 30 
minutes.  Then  it  was  cooled  and  filtered  through  0.45mm  membrane  filter.  Then  the 
precursor salt is prepared by taking 20  mg of  Gold(iii) chloride in 5 ml of distilled water.   For 
the preparation of gold nps, 20  ml of plant extract was taken in a beaker and placed in a  hot 
magnetic stirrer  at 400c.  Then 1 ml of gold salt was added to it drop wise. The solution turned 
pink indicating  gold nps. 

Au3+  + 3e-  →   Au0 

Characterisation: 
 UV-Visible Analysis :  The  absorption spectrum shows formation of Au as it shows a surface 
Plasmon    resonance  (SPR  )  band  at550nm.  Plasmons  are  sub  particles  arising  out  of 
quantization of plasma oscillations. SPR results from the resonant oscillation of  free electrons 
at the interface between positive and negative permittivity mutually stimulated by light. It is 
otherwise  a manifestation of a coherent oscillation of conduction band electrons.  

 
 
 
X-ray diffraction study :   XRD    pattern shows the production of Au nps by the reduction of 
Au3+ to Au . It identifies the crystallographic nature of nps. The peak (111)  at 2ѳ=  38o shows 
nps with fcc structure. Calculating the crystalline size ( d) using Debye -Scheres equation, 

d  =0.94λ  /βcos ѳ ≈ 15nm = K λ /βcos ѳ  ,K≈ 1,  ѳ = Bragg angle or  diffraction angle 

Synthesis, characterization and application of Ag nps : 

1) Preparation of plant extract : 20  gm of finely divided NEEM leaves were boiled with100 ml 
of double distilled water for 30 minutes. It was then filtered using a 0.45mm   membrane filter 
to get the extract. 
2)  Preparation  of  AgNO3  solution:  Suitable amount  of  AgNO3  salt  was  added  to  double 
distilled water to prepare 10  ml of the solution after boiling. 
3)Synthesis of Ag np ;  5 ml of extract was taken inside a 50 ml beaker and placed in a magnetic 
stirrer. Then 1  ml of above salt solution was added to it drop wise using a micropipette. The 
colour suddenly changed to yellowish brown indicating formation of nps.  
Ag+   + e-  ----→  Ag 
Characterisation  :  The  sample  was  characterized  using  uv-vis  spectroscopy  and  x-ray 
diffraction study. 
UV-VIS  study : The absorption maxima found at 400nm  indicates  formation of AgNO 3  nps. 

 
 
 
XRD  STUDY: It provides information about the crystalline nature and size of nps. The peak at 
2ѳ  =380  corresponds to(111)  plane of nps and reveals fcc structure of silver nps. The size of 
nps can be calculated by Debye-Scherer equation, 

d  = 0.94λ/β cos ɵ  ≈13nm   ( β = 0.001   - 0.02) 

Application:  Food  packaging,  cosmetic  industry,  bio-sensors, catalysis,  coating  materials, 
textile industry. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: 

The courseware material  prepared may  contain  some text, figures  and diagrams  taken 
from google  images and other readily  available  web sources. The contents are prepared for the 
use of students  in Silicon  Institute  of Technology  as additional  reference material,  and not for 
any commercial  purpose. 

 
 
 
 
 
