FOREWORD 

This  is  the  second  iteration  of  preparing  our  own  courseware  material,  after  successful 
completion  of a similar  task undertaken  a few years ago.  These contents have been carefully 
prepared and should  serve as excellent  auxiliary  material  for both  instructors  and students.   

The  Special  Academic  Group,  Autonomy  (SAGA)  was  formed  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
preparing  courseware contents  primarily  in  the  first-year  theory  subjects;  a few second-year 
subjects were also included.   The subjects for the first year were - Basic Electrical  Engineering, 
Basic  Electronics  Engineering,  Computer  Programming,  Data  Structures  and  Algorithms, 
Engineering  Mathematics  I and II, Engineering  Physics, Engineering  Chemistry,  Constitution 
of India,  Environmental  Science and Engineering  and Communicative  and Technical  English.   
For  the second  year,  the subjects  for which  courseware material  was prepared  were Analog 
Electronic  Circuits,  Digital  Systems  Design,  Circuit  Theory  and  Measurements  and 
Instruments. 
Faculty  members from all  the departments contributed  to the task. They were, in  no particular 
order,  Nalini  Singh,  Bimal  Meher,  Saumyaranjan  Dash,  Mukti  Routray,  Susmita  Biswal, 
Manasa Dash,  Bipin  Tripathy,  Sibasankar  Nayak,  Janmejay  Senapati,  Subrat  Sahu,  Pradeep 
Moharana,  Rupambika  Pattanaik,  Dhananjay  Tripathy,  Jagadish  Patra, Sachin  Das, Deepak 
Ranjan  Nayak,  Amulya  Roul,  Bodhisattva  Dash,  Sanghamitra  Das,  Gyana  Ranjan  Biswal, 
Nibedita  Swain  and Rajan Mishra. 

The entire  group  worked  diligently  to  successfully  complete  the  task which  included  a peer 
review of the material.  I take this opportunity  to thank all the members of the SAGA group  for 
a job  well  done.   

I  sincerely  hope  that  this  courseware material  comes  in  handy  and  is  utilized  to  the  fullest 
extent.  These are readily  available  additional  resources prepared in accordance with the Silicon 
autonomy  syllabus,  to complement  textbooks  and classroom  lectures. If there are any errors, I 
would  be grateful  if  they are brought  to my notice  so that we can correct them in  subsequent 
versions. 

Dr. Jaideep Talukdar, Principal 
Silicon Institute of Technology 
Bhubaneswar  
December 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Module  – 1: ECOLOGY & BIOGEOCHEMICAL 
CYCLES 

Historically, Rachel Carson’s 1962  book “Silent Spring” started wide -scale awareness 
in the 60s about the environment; she battled some large chemical corporations and created 
public knowledge and understanding of the fragility of ecosystems, and the environment in 
general. 
Origin 

The word “Environment” has come from an old french word environ or environner to be exact 
which literally means “to encircle” or “to surround”. 

Definition 

The word “environment” can be defined as “our life support system which includes air, water, 
land/soil & all other natural resources present around us”. 

According to ISO:14001  (International Organization for Standardization), environment can be 
defined as,  “Surroundings  in  which  an  organization  operates,  including  air,  water,  land, 
natural resources, flora(plants), fauna(animals), human beings and interrelations”.  

Related Terms 

1. Environmental Science 

2. Environmental Engineering 

3. Environmental Management 

4. Environmental Laws 

1.Environmental  Science 

It is the study of human beings’ impact on the environment and the physical, chemical and 
biological changes occurring in nature which focuses on pollution. It is highly interdisciplinary 
&  it  collects  information  from  various  fields  such  as  biology,  chemistry,  geography, 

agriculture, geology etc. 

2. Environmental Engineering 

It  is  defined  as  that  branch  of  engineering  whi ch  is  concerned  with  protecting  the 
environment  from  the  potentially  deleterious  or  harmful  effects  of  human  activities, 
protecting the human population from the effects of environmental pollution and improving 
the environmental quality for better human health & well-being. 

3. Environmental Management 

It  consists of  auditing of  EIA  (Environmental Impact  Assessment), Planning, Preparing  EIS 
(Environmental Impact Statement) & pollution management. 

4. Environmental Laws 

It involves the body of statuaries, policies those are made in order to protect the nature from 
being misused by human beings. Some laws are regulative or controlling in nature while some 
are for preventive measure & some are binding on us. 

Building Blocks of Environmental Engineering 

Sustainable Development (SD) 

It  can  be  defined as  “the  ability to  meet the  needs of  present generation without 
compromising the ability of future generation to meet their needs” i.e. the balance or proper 
use of resources, so that our  future generation will not face any problem for their survival, 
after taking care of our own survival needs.  

 
Pillars or Components of SD 

There are three pillars or components of Sustainable Development (SD) i.e.  

a) Economical Development 

b) Society or community Development 

c) Environmental Protection 

Human  Dimension in Env. Engg. 

It is also known as  Three factor  model for assessing environmental degradation. To 
estimate or  assess the extent of environmental degradation John Holdern (a  physicist) and 
Paul  Ehrlich  (a  biologist) has  given  a  three  factor  model.  According  to  this  model,  total 
environmental Impact  (I)  of  degradation  and  pollution due  to  population in  a  given area 
depends on three factors i.e. P, A, T. 

P represents Size of population 

A represents Affluence or Per capita Consumption or per person consumption 

T represents Technology used. 

The relationship is, I = PAT 

In the developing countries, P3 syndrome i.e. (Population, Pollution, Poverty) and in the rich 
developed countries overuse of natural resources are the key or important factors leading to 
environmental degradation. 

Environmental Problems 

The major environmental problems that we are facing are –  

a) Water Pollution 

b) Air Pollution 

c) Biodiversity Depletion 

d) Large amount of Waste Production 

e) Food Supply Problems 

Causes of Environmental Problems 

Many Environmental Problems presently we are facing are mainly due to – 

 a) Over Population 

 b) Wasteful use of Resources 

 c) Destruction & Degradation of Wildlife Habitats 

d) Depletion & Contamination of Surface Water & Ground Water 

e) Depletion of Non-Renewable resources or minerals 

 f) Deforestation 

 g) Soil Erosion 

 h) Loss of Biodiversity  

Definition of Pollution 

It is an undesirable change in physical, chemical or  biological characteristics of air, water & 
soil, that may harmfully affect human beings, animals, the plant life, industrial progress, living 
conditions & cultural assets. 

Definition of Pollutant 

It is an undesirable harmful solid, liquid or gaseous substance present in such a concentration 
in the environment which tends to be injurious for the whole living organisms. 

Ecological Concepts 

The word ecology was coined by Ernst Haeckel from two Greek words, Oikos & Logos. Oikos 
means  House  or  Living  Space  &  Logos  means  Study.  Ecology  is  the  branch  of  Biology 
concerned  with  the  relations  of  various  species  to  one  another  &  to  their  physical 
surroundings 

Ecological Perspective 

Ecological perspective demands a greater understanding of the functioning of living systems 
&  their  interactions  with  the  environment.  It  gives  a  qualitative emphasis  on  ecological 
concepts. 

Principles of ecology 

• 

Living organisms can’t exist with total disregard to their environment. 

•  All living organisms & their physical environment are interdependent upon each other 

& also affect each other. 

•  Every  living organism has  certain  limits of  tolerance towards  the various factors  of 

environment & only within these limits the organisms can survive. 

•  The existence of life depends upon flow of energy through food chains & the cycling 

of nutrients. 

Aspects of ecology 

The two important aspects of ecology are – 

a) Autecology or species ecology 

b) Synecology or community ecology 

a) Autecology 

It is concerned with the ecology of an individual species & it’s population.  

b) Synecology 

It  is  the  study  of  communities, their  composition, their  behaviour  &  the  relation  to  the 
environment. 

Synecology is further subdivided into three categories –  

i) 
ii) 
iii) 
i) 

ii) 

iii) 

Population Ecology 
 Genetic Ecology 
Taxonomic Ecology 
Population Ecology 
It relates with individual organisms with different groups of organisms within the 
ecosystem of different levels & the interrelationship among themselves.  
Genetic Ecology 
It  is also known as  Gene Ecology.  Different organisms have different genes and 
chromosomes; hence they live in different places.  
The relationship due to the variation in genes among biotic components with their 
surroundings non-biotic environment is known as Genetic Ecology. 
Taxonomic Ecology 
It  includes  ecology  of  taxonomic  groups  such  as  microbes,  vertebrates  (with 
backbone), invertebrates (without backbone) & insects etc. 

Ecosystem 

An ecosystem is defined as a natural functional ecological unit comprising of living organisms 
(i.e. biotic community) &  their non-living (i.e. abiotic) environment that interact to form a 
stable self-supporting system. 

Example: Pond ecosystem, Forest ecosystem etc. 

The ecosystems are characterized by a  diversity of species, but in an ecosystem there must 
be representatives from the three functional or metabolic groups such as Primary Producers, 
Consumers & Decomposers. 

The ecosystems can vary in sizes.  

Properties of Ecosystem 

•  An Ecosystem exists independent of specific components i.e. an individual tree may 

die, but a forest persist. 

•  The components of an ecosystem are interdependent. 
•  The nature of ecosystem depends on the species biodiversity of the ecosystem. 
•  The function of ecosystem depends on the energy flow & cycling of chemical elements 

within the ecosystems. 

•  The  ecosystem can  be  disturbed by  human  activities &  the  most  adverse effect of 

disturbance is the loss of biodiversity. 

Types of Ecosystem 

1.  Natural Ecosystem 
2.  Artificial or Man-made or Man-engineered Ecosystem 

1.Natural  Ecosystem 

These ecosystems operate by themselves under natural conditions. 

Depending on the type of habitats, these are further sub-divided into – 

I) Terrestrial Ecosystem 

II) Aquatic Ecosystem 

I) Terrestrial Ecosystem 

It includes forest, grassland, desert ecosystems. 

II) Aquatic Ecosystem 

These ecosystems found in the aquatic environment. 

It can be divided into two categories – 

 a) Fresh water ecosystem 

b) Marine water ecosystem 

a) Fresh water ecosystem 

The Fresh water ecosystem can be 

i) Lotic & 

ii) Lentic 

Lotic means (moving or running water) 

 e.g. River or Stream ecosystem 

Lentic means (Still or Standing water) 

e.g. Pond, Lake ecosystem 

b) Marine water ecosystem 

These include salt water bodies which may be Ocean ecosystem, Sea ecosystem. 

2.Artificial ecosystem 

These are maintained artificially by human beings. 

e.g. garden, park. 

Structure or components of ecosystem 

Ecosystem has two major components. 

1. Abiotic &  

2. Biotic 

1. Abiotic can be classified into hydrosphere, atmosphere & lithosphere  

2. Biotic can be classified into producer, consumer & decomposer. 

Consumer can be primary, secondary, tertiary consumers. 

Functions of ecosystem 

Energy flow: It regulates the flow of energy from one level to the other. 

Nutrient cycling: It regulates cycling of nutrients. 

Environmental gradients: The ecosystem fix the limit of tolerance for each organism towards 
various factors of environment. 

Food Chain & Food Web: The energy produced by green plants are passed to next levels by a 
chain of consumers leading to formation of food chain & interlinking of food chain will lead 
to formation of food web. 

Biodiversity: The ecosystem regulates the species diversity to acquire a stable system. 

Natural Resources 

The materials those occur in the environment or those are created by the environment 
&  useful for  supporting  life or  promoting  the  well -being of  human  beings  are  termed  as 
natural resources  

Natural Resources  are the naturally occurring  substances those are considered valuable in 
their natural form & their value rest in the amount of material available & the demand for it.  

Types of Natural Resources 

There are three types of natural resources – 

1) Renewable or Inexhaustible  

i.e. available in unlimited quantity. 

Ex – Solar energy, wind power etc. 

2) Non-renewable or exhaustible 

i.e. available in limited quantity 

Ex – coal, petrol, diesel etc. 

3) Abstract  Natural Resources 

It includes animals, plants & natural landscapes as part of countryside used for recreation & 
tourism activities. 

Ex – Bird watching, sight-seeing  

Value of environment 

The  value  of  the  environment is  considered  on  the  basis  of  the  economic  status  of  the 
particular region. Natural resources existing in the region are the backbone on the economic 
status. 

The following four points will help in evaluating the environment –  

 1. Environmental Auditing 

 2. Biodiversity 

 3. Cost-Benefit Analysis 

 4. Environmental Ethics  

 
1. Environmental Auditing 

Environmental Audit is defined as a systematic listing of natural resources in an area 
playing a key role for economic status &  sustainable developments of mankind in that area 
following definite management & regulatory systems.  

Generally, it provides a list of all the resources present in the area. 

The audit activities are carried out in three phases –  

 a) Pre-audit activities 

 b) On-site audit activities 

 c) Off-site or Post audit activities    

1(a) Pre-audit activities 

It includes planning, scheduling the audit activities & selecting the audit team. 

1(b) Onsite audit activities 

It includes interviewing of the site personnel & Inspecting the site. 

1(c) Post audit activities 

It includes – 

•  Preparing & distributing audit reports 

•  Determining potential solutions 

•  Assigning responsibilities 

• 

Implementing actions & 

•  Conducting follow-up of the action plan.   

2.Biodiversity 

It  doesn’t imply just a  collection of species, but  is a  basic  resource which  acts  as  a 

human life support system. Biodiversity plays an important role in biogeochemical cycles. 

Biodiversity has three hierarchical levels i.e. 

   i) Genetic Biodiversity 

   ii) Species Biodiversity   

   iii) Ecosystem Biodiversity 

There can be three kinds of losses of biological resources. 

    i) Depletion of a once common species 

    ii) Local or global extinction 

    iii) Ecosystem disruption. 

3. Cost-Benefit Analysis 

Working principles for Cost-Benefit Analysis include –  

i) The SMS approach 

SMS stands for Safe Minimum Standard 

ii) The Minimax rule 

Minimax stands for minimizing maximum losses 

i) The SMS approach 

It attempts to provide a decision-making process for problems involving long period of time 
& large uncertainties. This approach makes conservation the preferred option.  

ii) The Minimax rule 

It is a necessarily pessimistic decision rule biased towards conservation. 

4. Environmental Ethics 

It gives the attitude of people towards other living beings & the natural environment.  
We, human beings must eradicate our feelings of superiority over the rest of natural world & 

develop an “I-Thou” relationship rather than “I-It” relationship with the environment. 

Levels of organization in Biotic Components 

There are six major levels of ecological organization are recognized in the biotic components 
of the environment. 

1) Individual 

2) Population 

3) Community 

4) Ecosystem 

5) Biomes &  

6) Biosphere 

1) Individual 

These are single species. Individuals have physiological functions & respond to environmental 
conditions 

2) Population 

Population consists of a group of individuals of the same species living in a particular area at 
the same time. Birth rate, death rate plays an important role in the size of population.  

3) Community 

Population of different species living together interact with each other to form a community. 

Niche 

A suitable or comfortable position in the ecological hierarchy for a species.  

Ex- Phytoplankton → Zooplankton→  Fish → Whale 

Niche of fish in the above ecological hierarchy is three or 3rd  position.  

4) Ecosystem 

It includes both biotic &  abiotic components of an area.  The major or important feature of 
this ecological level is the strong interaction between the various biotic & abiotic components 
present. Nutrient cycling & energy flow occur in this ecological level  

5) Biomes 

When environmental conditions are similar in different parts of the country or around  the 
globe, the habitats & communities are also often similar, giving rise to a higher level of biotic 
organization known as biomes. 

Ex- a) Tropical Rainforest (High temp.& High rainfall) 

      b) Desert Scrub (High temp. & low rainfall)   

6) Biosphere 

The highest organizational level is the biosphere & it extends from bottom of the sea to the 
top of the sky where life exists. Biogeochemical cycles occur at this ecological level.  

Ecosystem Process: 

In  the  ecosystem  process,  the  following  processes  are  essential  for  the  survival  & 
maintenance of biotic components.  

1. Energy flow & 

2. Nutrient cycling 

1. Energy flow 

On the earth, the ultimate source of energy for life is solar radiation. 

There are two sources of energy – 

a) Autotrophic 

b) Heterotrophic     

1.(a) Autotrophic 

Autotrophic production of energy is carried out within the ecosystem by green plants in the 

presence of sunlight using photosynthesis process. 

1.(b) Heterotrophic 

Heterotrophic energy source is the one, where the chemical energy is imported as organic 
matter which is originated from primary production in some other ecosystem. 

This imported organic matter is called allochthonous. 

Photosynthesis 

12H2O  + 6CO2 + 709kcal  (from sunlight)→ C6H12O6(Carbohydrate)+  6O2  + 6H2O               

Out of total amount of solar radiation available, only 1 to 5%  is used in the photosynthesis 
process. The organic matter produced by green plants in the Photosynthesis process is called 

Primary Production or (PP). 

PP is affected by various environmental factors like water, light, temperature & soil nutrients. 
PP is of 2 types. 

1) GPP (Gross Primary  Production) 

2) NPP (Net Primary  Production) 

GPP – R(Respiration) = NPP 

GPP is the total amount of chemical energy or biomass stored by plants per unit area per unit 
time. Since plant requires energy for synthesis of organic matter & functioning of plant itself, 
some of GPP is used in the process of respiration. 

NPP is used for plant growth & reproduction. NPP is normally 80  to 90%  of GPP. 

As various environmental factors affect PP, hence GPP & NPP vary over the globe. NPP can be 
classified into four broad groups each with a characteristic productivity range.  

1.  Low range – 0 to 250  gm/m2 – year  

Ex- Desert, semi-desert 

 2. Middle range – 250  to 1000  gm/m2 – year 

Ex- Non-forest communities like shrubland, grassland 

3. Normal range – 1000  to 2000  gm/m2 – year 

Ex- Forest  

4. High range – 2000  to 3000  gm/m2 – year  

Ex- Rainforest   

Respiration 

When any organism requires energy, the reverse chemical reaction of photosynthesis 
occurs, known as respiration, where the glucose molecule is broken down in the presence of 
oxygen to produce CO2, H2O & energy for work done & maintenance. The reaction is – 

C6H12O6+6O2→ 6CO2+6H20+  energy for work done & maintenance 

2. Nutrient cycling 

During decomposition, the complex organic molecules in the original detritus or waste 
are gradually broken down to much simpler constituents & inorganic molecules like nitrates 

& phosphates, as the material moves through the decomposer or detritus food chain. 

These are then, enter into the soil or sediment or dissolved in water, where they become the 
nutrients available for reuse by green plants. 

This whole process of recycling of nutrients within the ecosystem is known as nutrient cycling. 

Overview of 2 major ecosystem process of energy flow, nutrient cycling 

 
Food Chain 

Chemical energy produced  by primary  producers  &  the nutrients used by  plants to 
build plant tissues, are passed up by a chain of consumers leading to formation of food chain, 
where each link in the chain is provided with energy & nutrients.  

Depending on the types of foods, there are three types of food chain available.  

   a) Predator or Grazing Food Chain 

    b) Saprophytic or Detritus Food Chain 

    c) Parasitic Food Chain   

a) Predator  or Grazing Food Chain 

Predator means an animal that naturally preys on others. 

Ex:- Sunlight→Grass→Grasshopper→Frog→Snake→ Hawk 

b) Saprophytic  or Detritus Food Chain 

It starts from DOM (Dead Organic Matter) & goes to detritus feeding organisms i.e. detrivores 
i.e. bacteria, worms etc. & on to their predators. 

Ex:- Dead leaves→Soil mites→Insects→Lizard  

c) Parasitic  Food Chain 

It is a food chain in which parasites live on the host body or within the host body to get energy. 

This food chain also starts from the green plants & animals to parasitic microbes.  

 
 
 
Food Web 

In most ecosystems, food chains interlink with each other to produce food web. Food web 
shows the food pattern of energy flow in the ecosystem. 

Tropic Level 

Tropic level or nutritional level or tier gives the feeding status of an organism in an ecosystem. 
It is based on the concept who feeds on whom. 

It can be -  

i)First tropic level or primary  producer level  

Ex: - Green plants 

ii)Second tropic level or primary consumer level  

Ex: - Herbivores 

iii)Third tropic level or secondary consumer level 

Ex: - Carnivores 

Ecological pyramid 

The graphical representation of tropic levels is called the ecological pyramid.  

The arrangement of organisms in a food chain according to tropic levels forms a pyramid. 

Generally, pyramids are of three types. 

1. Pyramid of energy 

 
2. Pyramid of biomass 

3. Pyramid of numbers. 

1. Pyramid of energy 

Generally, 10% energy is transferred between adjacent tropic levels & rest 90% of energy  is 
used up in that tropic level giving rise to energy pyramid. This is called 10% rule of ecosystem. 

It is based on rate of energy flow & productivity at each successive tropic level.  

It decreases from autotrophs to higher tropic level. 

2. Pyramid of biomass 

It shows the total mass of the organisms in each tropic level. It is based on total dry weight 
present in the level. It decreases from autotrophs to higher tropic level. 

 
 
3. Pyramid of Numbers 

It  shows the number  of organisms in  each  tropic level. There may  be gradual  decrease or 
increase in the number of individuals. 

Standing Crop 

The  amount  of living materials in different tropic  level or  in any  component population is 
known as standing crop. It can be expressed as number/unit area or as biomass. 

Ecological Succession 

In an ecosystem, new species may succeed older species. The process of gradual  change in 
the conditions of physical environment, leading to the change in the species structure of an 
ecological community (i.e. replacement of one species by the other) over space &  time, is 
called Ecological Succession or Ecological Development. 

Biogeochemical Cycles 

•  Bio means living beings 
•  Geo means earth extended to air & water, where life exists. 
•  Chemical means chemical elements which continuously move in the cycles. 

 
•  The cyclic pathways through which chemical elements move from environment to the 

organisms & back to the environment are called bio-geochemical cycles. 

•  All parts or components of different ecological systems, on a local or global scale are  

linked with the Biogeochemical Cycles. 

•  Biogeochemical Cycles can have a number of phases & reservoirs. 

   1) Organic Phase 
    2) Inorganic Phase  

1) Organic Phase  

In this phase, nutrients pass rapidly through biotic communities using food chain.  

2) Inorganic Phase  

It contains all nutrient elements & are external to food chain. 

The various sub-phases of the inorganic phase are – 

    a) Sedimentary Phase 
    b) Atmospheric Phase 
    c) Aquatic Phase or Aquatic Reservoir 

a) Sedimentary Phase  

It involves interactions with the solid earth or rocks & results of geological activities such as 
weathering. 

b) Atmospheric Phase 

It forms major part of some cycles like ‘N’ cycle & ‘C’ cycle & minor parts of some cycles like 
‘P’ Cycle. 

c) Aquatic Phase or Aquatic Reservoir 

It involves plant nutrients. 

Types of biogeochemical cycles 

There are two types of biogeochemical cycles. 

I) Air or Atmospheric Cycle. 
II) Water or Hydrological Cycle 

I) Air or Atmospheric Cycle 

It can be classified into – 

 i) C – Carbon 

 ii) N – Nitrogen  
 iii) O – Oxygen 
 iv) P – Phosphorous  
 v)S – Sulphur  

i) Carbon Cycle  

The carbon cycle is nature's way of reusing carbon atoms, which travel from the atmosphere 
into  organisms  in  the  earth  and  then  back  into  the  atmosphere  over  and  over  again. 
Most carbon is  stored  in  rocks  and  sediments,  while  the  rest  is  stored  in  the  ocean, 
atmosphere, and living organisms. 

ii) Nitrogen Cycle 

Nitrogen Cycle is a  biogeochemical process through which nitrogen is converted into 
many forms, consecutively passing from the atmosphere to the soil to organism and back into 
the  atmosphere.  It  involves  several  processes  such  as nitrogen  fixation,  nitrification, 
denitrification, decay and putrefaction.  

 
 
iii) Oxygen Cycle 

The oxygen cycle is the cycle that helps move oxygen through the three main regions 
of  the  Earth,  the Atmosphere, the  Biosphere, and  the Lithosphere. The  Atmosphere is  of 
course  the  region of  gases  that  lies above the  earth's  surface  and  it  is  one of  the  largest 
reservoirs of free oxygen on earth. 

iv) Phosphorous Cycle 

Phosphorus moves in a cycle through rocks, water, soil and sediments and organisms. 
Over time, rain  and weathering cause  rocks to  release phosphate ions and  other minerals. 
This  inorganic  phosphate  is  then  distributed in  soils and  water.  Plants  take  up  inorganic 
phosphate from the soil. 

 
 
v) Sulphur Cycle 

The sulphur  cycle is  the  collection  of  processes  by  which sulphur moves  between 
rocks,  waterways and  living systems. Such  biogeochemical  cycles are important  in geology 
because they affect many minerals.  

II) Water or Hydrological  Cycle 

The hydrological cycle of the earth is the sum total of all processes in which water moves from 
the  land  and  ocean  surface  to  the  atmosphere  and  back  in  form  of  precipitation. 
The hydrological cycle is dependent on various factors and is equally affected by oceans and 
land surfaces. 

 
 
Interception:- It is the evaporation of water from the outer surface of leaves during & after 
rainfall. 

Transpiration:-  It is the evaporation of water through foliage.  

Evapotranspiration:-  It is the combination of Evaporation from water bodies & transpiration 
from leaves. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Module  – 2: WATER & WASTEWATER 
TREATMENT 

Physical Properties of Water 

The various physical properties of water that shows wide variation in magnitude includes – 

•  Colour 
•  Turbidity 
•  Taste & odour 
•  Temperature 
•  Solids 
•  Colour 

It is measured in Hazen’s Scale. The permissible limit of colour for drinking water is 5mg/L or 
ppm. 

•  Turbidity 

It is the measure of cloudiness in water &  caused by presence of suspended matter which 
scatters  &  absorbs  light.  It  is  measured  in  NTU  (Nephelometric  Turbidity  Unit).  The 
Permissible limit of turbidity for drinking water is 1NTU. 

•  Taste & Odour 

This  may  be due to  presence of  micro-organisms, algae, dissolved minerals, salts etc.  It  is 
measured in TON (Threshold Odour Number). The permissible limit of TON for drinking water 
is 1 to 3. 

TON = (A + B)/ A  

A - Volume of Sample with odour  
B -Volume of Pure Water with no odour Added 
If A was a 100  ml sample and 100  ml of water had to be added to not detect the odour - the 

TON would be 2.  

TON = (100  + 100)/ 100=200/100=2. 

•  Temperature 

The temperature of water varies with atmospheric temperature & it is a significant parameter 
regarding characteristics of water. For drinking water, the temperature should be 10-250C. 

•  Solids 

Solids content of water represents the characteristics of water. 

Solids present in water can be studied as follows- 

a) Total Solids (TS) 
b) Suspended Solids (SS) 
c) Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) = TS – SS 
d) Total Volatile Solids (TVS) 
e) Volatile Suspended Solids (VSS) 
f) Filterable Solids (FS) & Non-Filterable Solids (NFS)  

NFS = SS (Particle Size Range is 100 to 10-3 mm) 

FS can be Colloidal (Particle Size Range is 10-3 to 10-6 mm) & 

Dissolved (Particle Size Range is 10-6  to 10-9  mm) 

Chemical Properties of Water 

It can be Inorganic & Organic 

Inorganic Chemical properties of water includes  

•  PH 
•  Alkalinity & Acidity 
•  Hardness 

Conductivity 

Organic Chemical properties of water includes 

•  BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) 
•  COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand) 
•  TOC (Total Organic Carbon) 
•  TOD (Total Oxygen Demand) 

Inorganic Chemical properties of water 

•  PH 

PH is Potential of Hydrogen or Power of Hydrogen 

PH = - log [H+] or 
      = - log [H3O+] 

PH range for public water supplies is 6.5 to 8.5. 

Q.  In  a  water  treatment plant, the  PH  values  of  incoming  &  outgoing  water  are  7.2  &  8.4 
respectively. Assuming a linear variation of PH with time, determine the average P H value of 
water. 

•  Alkalinity & Acidity 

Alkalinity is also known as ANC or (Acid Neutralizing Capacity) & Acidity is also known as BNC 
or (Base Neutralizing Capacity) 

Alkalinity can be of three types.  

a) Carbonate Alkalinity 

b) Bicarbonate Alkalinity & 

c) Hydroxide Alkalinity 

•  Hardness 

Hard water has high mineral content. Hardness of water are of two types. 

a) Temporary Hardness or Carbonate Hardness 

b) Permanent Hardness or Non-Carbonate Hardness  

a) Temporary  Hardness 

It is due to carbonate & bicarbonate of Ca+2 & Mg+2. 

b) Permanent Hardness 

It is due to Chloride & Sulphate of Ca+2 & Mg+2. 

Hardness of water is expressed in mg/L as CaCO3. The permissible limit of hardness of drinking 
water is 200  mg/L as CaCO3. 

Hardness in mg/L  as CaCO3 

= [M+2(concentration in mg/L) X 50]/  [equivalent weight of M+2]  

= M+2(Concentration in meq/L) X 50      

Q. Determine the various hardness of the following water sample. 

Concentration (in mg/L) 

Constituent 
    Ca+2                           60 
   Mg+2                                29.3 
-                               366 
   HCO3
•  Conductivity or Electrical Coductivity  

It is the measure of the ability of an aqueous solution to carry an electric current. The equation 
can be, 

ec= ƩCifi 

 
where,   

ec is electrical conductivity in μs(siemens)/cm, 

Ci is concentration of ionic species in solution in mg/L & 

fi is conductivity factor for ionic species. 

Organic Chemical properties of water 

•  BOD5 = 0.6  COD 
•  CBOD or Carbonaceous  BOD = 0.92  COD 

Q. Determine COD & TOC for glucose(C6H12O6)? 

Q.  If  bacteria cells are  represented by the  chemical formula C 5H7O2N,  then determine the 
potential carbonaceous BOD, when bacteria cell concentration is 1000mg/L.   

Q.  A wastewater is analysed &  is shown to  contain 100  mg/L  of ethylene glycol (C 2H6O2) & 
120  mg/L of phenol(C6H6O). Determine COD & TOC. 

Organic Content Parameter of Water 

When  an  organic  waste  is  discharged to  a  stream,  the  organic  content  of  the  effluent or 
discharge undergoes a biochemical reaction with the help of micro-organisms. 

BOD = P(DOI-DOF) 

Where, P is Dilution Ratio, 

 
 
DOI & DOF are initial & final DO (Dissolved Oxygen) concentration 

Corrected BOD = P[(DOI-DOF)-f(BI-BF)] 

Where, f is the correction factor or seeding factor=1-(1/P), 

BI  &  BF  are initial &  final DO  (Dissolved Oxygen) concentration of seeded diluted water  or 
Blank 

Q. The results from a BOD test diluted by 100  are given below. Calculate the BODS. 

Time (in days)             DO(in mg/L) 
      0                                     7.95 
       1                                     3.75 
       2                                     3.45 
       3                                     2.75 
       4                                     2.15 
       5                                     1.80 

Q. The results from a BOD test diluted by 100  are given below. Calculate the Corrected BOD S. 

Time (in days)   DO(in mg/L)      Blank DO(in mg/L) 
      0                          7.95                        8.15 
       1                         3.75                        8.10 
       2                         3.45                        8.05 
       3                         2.75                        8.00 
       4                         2.15                        7.95 
       5                         1.80                        7.90 

The rate of decomposition of organic matter is directly proportional to the amount of organic 
matter available & it is a first order reaction. 

i.e. d/dt(Lt)α Lt 

=> d/dt(Lt) = -k1xLt  

=> d(Lt)/Lt= k1xdt 

Where, Lt is BOD remaining in mg/L=BODr & 

K1 is deoxygenation rate coefficient 

Now taking integration of both sides and putting initial condition at t=0,  Lt=L0,  we will have 
final expression for BOD exerted at any time t i.e.  

BODt=  L0(1-e-k

t) 
1

Q. If K1 or deoxygenation rate coefficient is 0.15 per day, then determine the ultimate BOD or 
BODu or L0.  

Temperature effect on K1 

Temperature has an effect on K1 & is given by, 

KT = (K20)x(Ɵ)(T-20) 

Where,  

KT= The deoxygenation rate coefficient at T0C 

K20=The deoxygenation rate coefficient at 200C 

Ɵ = Coefficient= 1.047  for 200C<  T < 300C & 

               = 1.35  for 40C < T < 200C 

NBOD 

The Oxygen demand associated with the oxidation of ammonia (NH3) to nitrate (NO3
Nitrogenous BOD or NBOD. 

-) is called 

2NH3 + 3O2→2NO2

- + 2H+ + 2H2O 

2NO2

- + O2 → 2NO3
- 

So 2NH3 + 4O2 → 2NO3

- + 2H+  + 2H2O 

Finally, NH3 + 2O2 → NO3

- + H+ + H2O  

Q. Determine the TOD (Total Oxygen Demand) if the sample contains 25 mg/L of N.  

BOD remaining (BODr) graph 

 
 
BOD exerted (BODt) graph 

CBOD & NBOD  relationship 

Q. 15ml of sample was diluted in 300ml bottle. Initial DO was 8.9 mg/L & final DO after 5days 
was 4.4mg/L. The corresponding initial & final DO of diluted water was 9.1mg/L  & 9.05  mg/L. 
Find out 5 days BOD at 200C.   

 
 
Q. BOD  of an  sample incubated for one day at 300C was found to be 100mg/L.  What would 
be the 5 day BOD at 200C. The deoxygenation rate coefficient (K1) is 0.12  at 200C. 

Q. Determine the two day BOD for a wastewater at 200C, while BOD5 at 200C  is 250mg/L. The 
deoxygenation rate coefficient(K1) value at 200C is 0.2  per day. What  shall be the BOD  after 
the end of seven days at 250C . 

Q.  A  BOD  test  was  conducted  taking  5%  wastewater  mixed  with  95%  aerated  water  for 
dilution & the following observations were found out: 

i) DO of the aerated water used for dilution is 3.6 mg/L 

ii) DO of the original wastewater sample is 0.8  mg/L 

iii) DO of the diluted wastewater after incubation at 200C  for 5 days is 0.7  mg/L 

Calculate the 5  days BOD of the above wastewater sample if  the deoxygenation constant is 
0.11.   

Aquatic Pollution 

The aquatic Pollution can be classified into three broad groups. 

a) Fresh water pollution or Surface water pollution 

b) Estuarine pollution 

c) Marine pollution 

a) Fresh water pollution 

The pollution of fresh water can be caused by:- 

•  Wastes from municipality & industries 
•  Oil from industry wastes & cleaning of vehicles 
•  Thermal waste from industries & power stations  
• 

 Heavy metals etc. 

b) Estuarine pollution 

Estuarine means tidal mouth of river or where river mixes with the sea. So if surface water is 
polluted then it can lead to pollution of estuarine. 

c) Marine pollution 

The main pollutants for Marine pollution are:- 

i) Manmade organic poisons like Pesticides & herbicides 

ii) Radioactivity due to radioactive substances. 

Point & Non-Point Sources of Pollution 

Point Sources are those, which discharge pollutants from specific locations such as chimney, 
drainpipe of factories etc. 

Point Sources are easier to monitor & regulate. 

Non-point sources of pollution are those, which don’t have any specific location of discharge. 

As a result, these are difficult to monitor & regulate.  

Ex:- Run-off from paddy fields, Lawns & Gardens. 

Oxygen Sag Curve 

The longitudinal profile of Oxygen concentration is Known as Oxygen sag curve. 

Eutrophication 

It can  be defined as the enrichment of water by inorganic plant nutrients like N & P, which 
results in increase in primary productivity. 

Artificial  eutrophication  is  known  as  cultural  eutrophication  which  is  caused  by  adding 

fertilizers.   

The problems arising due to Eutrophication are:- 

•  Water quality may have unacceptable taste & odour 
•  Water may be injurious to health 

 
•  The household usefulness of water may decrease. 

Oxygen transfer in waterbodies 

The oxygen transfer in waterbodies is given by Orlob equation i.e. 

{(Cg-C0)/(Cg-Ct)} = ek

2t 

Where,  

Cg = Saturation Concentration of oxygen 

C0 = Initial Concentration of oxygen 

Ct = Concentration of oxygen after time ‘t’ 

K2 = reaeration rate constant 

Q.  If saturation  concentration of  oxygen in water  is 9.2mg/L  &  the initial concentration  of 
oxygen is 2.1mg/L, then determine the time it takes to become 7.5mg/L, having K 2 value 0.25 
per day. What is the time required for Ct to be 5,6,7,8,9  mg/L. 

Ground water  Quality/Contamination 

The  simplest model of  decay of  a  contaminant is  to  assume  the decay  to  be  a  first order 
reaction i.e.  

r = - kc & 

Ct = C0e-Kt 

Where,  

Ct = Concentration at time ‘t’ in mg/L 

C0 = Initial Concentration in mg/L 

t = time in days 

K = first order decay coefficient  

Q.  Determine the concentration of a  contaminant at the downstream well, if the upstream 
concentration is 80mg/L. Assume decay constant (k) to be 10-4  per day & time (t) = 274  years 

Ground Water Recharge 

It is also known as deep percolation. It is a hydrologic process, where water moves downward 
from surface to ground. 

Recharge can occur both naturally & artificially. 

•  Natural way of recharge is occurred through hydrological cycle. 
•  Recharge  occurs  artificially, when  rainwater, reclaimed  water  or  recycled water  is 

injected or routed to the subsurface. 

Recharge can help move excess salts that accumulate in the root zone to deeper soil layers or 
into the deep groundwater system. 

Ground Water Flow 

The ground water flow is governed by Darcy’s law which can be expressed as follows:- 

Q = KiA  

= KA(dh/dL) 

= KA{(h2-h1)/(L2-L1)} 

Where,  

Q = horizontal flow in m3/sec 

K = hydraulic conductivity in m/sec 

i = dh/dL= hydraulic gradient 

A = cross sectional area in square mtr 

h2- h1= water head drop 

L2-L1 = Length difference over which water head drop occurs 

q = Q/A = Specific discharge or discharge per unit area 

Q.  Determine the  daily flow capacity  and  transmissivity of an  aquifer, if it’s height, width, 
length are 15mtr,  800mtr  & 2km respectively. The water head change over the length 2km is 
3mtr. The hydraulic conductivity (K) is 6x10-7 m/sec.  

Water Table 

A  water table is the underground depth, at  which point the ground  is totally saturated by 
water. The water table may vary due to seasonal changes in precipitation, evapotranspiration 
& topography etc. 

Aquifer 

An aquifer is a body of saturated rock through which water can easily move. An aquifer 
is an underground layer of water bearing permeable rock from which ground water can  b e 
extracted using a water well. 

Aquifer can be of two types- 

•  a) Unconfined aquifer 
•  b) Confined aquifer 

a) Unconfined aquifer 

An unconfined aquifer is the one which is open to receive water from the ground surface & 
whose water  table  surface  is  free to  fluctuate  up  &  down, depending on  the  recharge  & 
discharge rate. 

These are extremely susceptible to contamination. 

b) Confined aquifer 

These types of aquifers have rock layer with less permeability or confining bed of rock above 
them  due  to  which  water  can’t  enter  freely into  these type  of  aquifers from  the  ground 
surface. 

These are less susceptible to contamination. 

Concept of Hydrology 

i) Water Balance or Water Budget 

ii) Hyetograph & Hydrograph 

iii)Rainfall-Runoff Relationship or Rational formula for determining runoff 

 
i)Water Balance or Water Budget 

It gives the quantitative account of hydrological cycle. The equation for water balance is based 
on conservation of mass. 

The water balance equation is 

P= R+E+∆S+∆G  

Where,  

P is Precipitation 

R is Runoff 

E is Evaporation 

∆S is change in soil moisture status 

∆G is change in ground water status  

ii) Hyetograph  & Hydrograph   

Hyetograph represents rainfall intensity vs time. 

Hydrograph represents runoff or stream discharge vs time. 

If time is unit i.e. 1hr., then hydrograph will be unit hydrograph.  

iii)Rainfall-Runoff Relationship or 

Rational formula for determining runoff  

Q = CIA 

Where, 

Q is runoff in m3/sec 

C is locality coefficient 

I is Rainfall Intensity in mm/hr 

A is Catchment Area in square KM 

Peak Discharge (QP)or Peak Run-off  

It can be expressed as follows- 

QP = 0.278  CIA 

Modified Rational Formula given by Wallingford is- 

QP =  0.278CVCRIA 

Where, CV is volumetric runoff coefficient & CR is Routing Coefficient 

Water Treatment 

The objectives of water treatment are- 

A) To produce Water which is safe for human consumption 

B) To produce Water at a reasonable cost 

C) To reduce water impurities to acceptable levels 

Organoleptic Parameters 

Organoleptic Parameters are those parameters which can be sensed or felt by human organs. 

Ex:- Colour, Taste & Odour etc. 

Classes of Water treatment 

            Descripition 

Class 
No Treatment          
  A 
  B 
Disinfection only            
  C          Standard water Treatment     
  D         Advanced/Special water       
              Treatment 

                Source 

Borehole water 
Borehole water 
River,Reservoir 
Industrial Water   

Monitoring Frequency 

The  water  quality  parameters  are  required to  be  monitored  depending on  the  s ource  & 
quality of raw water. 

The three categories are- 

A) Minimum monitoring(C1) 

B) Current monitoring(C2) 

C) Periodic Monitoring(C3)  

Water Treatment  Processes 

The treatment processes of water can be classified into three stages- 

A) Pretreatment processes 

  
 
 
 
 
B) Standard or Conventional processes 

C) Special or Advanced processes 

A) Pretreatment processes 

Some treatment processes are required prior to standard water treatment processes which 
may include- 

i) Screening 

ii) Storage 

iii) Aeration 

iv) Chemical pre-treatment 

i) Screening:- 

Different types of screens are used in this process. Those are can be - 

a) Coarse Screen 

b) Fine Screen 

c) Micro Screen  

a) Coarse Screen:- 

These screens contain typically inclined bars of 25mm dia & 100mm  spacing, preventing large 
floating matters from entering the treatment plant 

b) Fine Screen:- 

If storage  is not  provided, then  fine screens are  fitted after the coarse  screens. If  there is 
storage, then fine screens are placed at the outlet of the storage tanks. 

Fine screens are typically mesh with openings about 6mm dia or square 

C) Micro Screen:- 

In micro screens, mesh openings range from 20 to 40 µm.These type of screens are used only 
for relatively uncontaminated water.   

ii) Storage:- 

Storage  tanks  balance the  flows going to  the  treatment plant. Storage  capacity  should be 
equivalent to 7 to 10  days of the average water demand. The period of storage shouldn’t be 
long, so as not to encourage the growth of unwanted organisms 

iii) Aeration:- 

Aeration is the supply of oxygen from the atmosphere to water to effect beneficial changes 
in the quality of water. It is a common treatment process for groundwater 

Aeration is generally used for the followings- 

a) To release excess H2S gas which may cause undesirable taste & odour. 

b) To release excess CO2 which may have corrosive properties 

c) To increase oxygen content of water. 

iv) Chemical pre-treatment:- 

The chemical pre-treatment to remove undesirable properties of water like algae or  excess 
colour is a more expensive process than chemical post-treatment. In pre-treatment, greater 
amount  of  chemicals are  required to  effect the same  result as  some of  the chemicals are 
absorbed by turbidity of water.  

The two Chemical pre-treatment processes which are generally used are- 

a) Pre-Chlorination 

b) Activated Carbon  

a) Pre-chlorination:-  

It is used on low turbidity water with a high coliform count. The chlorine is injected into the 
water stream & it oxidizes & precipitates iron & manganese. It also kill pathogens & reduces 
colour. The chlorine dose used is 5mg/L.  Pre-chlorination also reduces NH3 in both  surface 
water & ground water supplies.   

b) Activated Carbon:- 

The activated Carbon is used for- 

i) Removal of Photosynthetic Algae 

ii) Improvement of colour & odour 

iii) Removal of organic compounds 

Activated Carbon can be used either as PAC (Powdered Activated Carbon) or as GAC (Granular 
Activated Carbon). Generally for water treatment PAC is used, but GAC is used where taste & 

odour of water have an industrial base. 

PAC has lower cost & efficiency than GAC. Doses may vary from 3 to 20 mg/L. 

B) Standard  or Conventional processes 

It includes- 

i) Sedimentation 

ii) Coagulation 

iii) Flocculation 

iv) Filtration & 

V) Disinfection 

i) Sedimentation 

The  heavier  large  particles  settle  down  by  the  force  of  gravity  at  the  bottom  of  the 
sedimentation tank,  which  is  called Sedimentation. Stoke’s law for  settling velocity is  the 
deciding force for sedimentation.  

Stoke’s law can be represented by- 

VS=(g/18µ)(ρs- ρw)d2 

Where,  

VS is settling velocity 

g is acceleration due to gravity 

µ is dynamic viscocity 

d is dia of settling particle 

ρs is density of particle settling  

ρw is density of water 

ii) Coagulation 

The lighter smaller particles don’t settle down by the force of gravity. To make them settle 
down, some amount of coagulants are added to the water, which is called Coagulation. 

Some examples of coagulants are- 

•  Alum i.e. aluminium sulphate 
•  Ferric Chloride 
•  Ferric Sulphate 
•  Ferrous Sulphate 

iii) Flocculation 

When coagulants are added to the water, the lighter smaller particles coagulate or combine 
with each other forming bigger particles, known as floc & the process is called flocculation.  

iv) Filtration 

It is the process of passing water through a  porous medium, with the expectation that the 
filtrate water has better quality than the incoming water. Generally, two types of filters are 
used 

a)Rapid gravity filter:- 

Here rate of filtration is high i.e. 5 to 20m/hr. 

b) Slow sand filter:- 

Here rate of filtration is slow i.e. 0.1 to 0.2m/hr. 

V) Disinfection 

By disinfection, pathogens & micro-organisms are killed, thereby making water more pure. 

The requirements of a good disinfectant are- 

a) It should be toxic to micro-organisms. 

b) It should have a fast rate of kill. 

 
c) It should be persistent enough to prevent regrowth of organisms in the distribution system. 

d) It shouldn’t produce undesirable compounds. 

e) It should be safe to handle. 

f) It should be of reasonable cost. 

Chick’s law 

The rate of destruction of micro-organisms is often a first order chemical reaction as given by 
Chick’s law i.e. 

Where, 

Nt = Number of organisms at time ‘t’ 

N0 = Number of organisms at time ‘t’= 0 

K = Rate constant depends on types of micro-organisms present & types of disinfectants used 

The various examples of disinfectants are- 

a) Chlorine dioxide 

b) Chlorination 

c) Chloramines 

d) UV radiation 

Chlorine demand & Breakpoint  Chlorination 

When chlorine is added to water, the chlorine at first oxidizes inorganic compounds & 
some amount of chlorine will be consumed by organic matter present in water. Then some 
amount of chlorine will be used for formation & subsequent destruction of chloramines.  

The  amount of  chlorine required to  fulfill the above consumption requirements are called 
chlorine demand. The point at which the chlorine demand is satisfied is called the breakpoint 
chlorination.    

()0()()(),ttttkttddNNNkNdtdtSoNNe−=−= 
The excess dose of chlorine after breakpoint, is available for disinfection which appears as 
residual  chlorine.  A  residual  chlorine  of  minimum  0.5mg/L  is  maintained  in  disinfection 
practices. 

C) Special or Advanced processes 

The purposes of advanced water treatment processes are- 

i)  To  take  water  treated  by  standard  water  treatment  processes  &  to  improve  it  to  an 
exceptionally high-quality water as often required by particular industries like food industry 
& pharmaceuticals etc. 

ii) To treat water containing specific chemical or microbiological contaminants, so that they 
can be brought to an acceptable standard. 

 
 
Wastewater Treatment 

Introduction 

Generation of wastewater is based on our water consumption rate, which is increasing 

& the way we use water.  

As undesirable contaminants are likely to be present in the wastewater, it can  contaminate 
or degrade our surface water or ground water resources, hence it should be properly treated 
before releasing to the water bodies or environment. 

Types of wastewater 

a) Domestic/Sanitary wastewater 

b) Industrial wastewater 

c) Agricultural wastewater 

d) Storm/Runoff water 

Common Terms 

Sewage- It refers to domestic / sanitary wastewater.  

Sewer- It refers to pipes carrying sewage. 

 
Sewerage- It refers to sewer network systems. 

FOG- It refers to Fat, Oil & Grease, which are basically immiscible layer in the wastewater.  

Wastewater Treatment Processes 

a) Pre-treatment 

b) Primary treatment 

c) Secondary or Biological treatment 

a) Pre-treatment 

Pre-treatment of municipal wastewater is required to make it useful for further treatment & 
to  decrease overall load  on  the system. It  includes Screening, Grit  Channels, Oil &  Grease 
removal, Chemical pre-treatment etc. 

b) Primary  treatment 

It basically removes suspended solids (SS) from the wastewater. Sometimes, it also removes 
some  organic  solids  along  with  inorganic  suspended  solids.  It  includes  sedimentation, 
coagulation etc. The removal efficiency w.r.t. SS is 50-70% and  w.r.t. removal of BOD is 25-
40%. 

c) Secondary  or Biological treatment 

It can be divided into two major categories, depending on the availability of oxygen.  

i) Aerobic Process i.e. it occurs in presence of oxygen & 

ii) Anaerobic Process i.e. it occurs in absence of oxygen. 

i) Aerobic Process 

Aerobic Processes like Trickling Filter, RBC  (Rotating Biological Contactor) &  ASP (Activated 
Sludge Process) etc. 

ii) Anaerobic Process 

Anaerobic process  has  three major  steps like Hydrolysis, Acidogenesis or  Fermentation & 
Methanogenesis. 

Aerobic vs Anaerobic Process 

• 

• 

In  aerobic  process, molecular oxygen present which is  absent in  case  of  anaerobic 
process. 
In aerobic process, stable oxidized end products like CO2 & H2O are generated, but in 
case of anaerobic process stable reduced end products like CH4 & NH3 are generated. 

• 
• 

• 

• 

In aerobic no byproduct recovery, but in anaerobic by product methane gas is useful. 
In  aerobic  appreciable  microbial  growth  occurs,  but  in  anaerobic  no  appreciable 
growth of microbes.  
In  aerobic  less skilled operation &  in  anaerobic more  skilled/stringent operation is 
required. 
In  aerobic  low  capital  cost  but  high  operating  cost  &  in  anaerobic  high  capital 
investment but low operating cost. 

•  Aerobic  process  is  suitable for  low  BOD  wastewater  like sewage  while  anaerobic 
process is suitable for high BOD wastewater/ sludge coming from sugar mills and other 
agrochemical operations.  

ASP (Activated Sludge Process) 

It  is  an  excellent method of  treating  either raw  sewage or  more generally the settled 
sewage. The sewage discharged from the primary sedimentation tank, which is normally used 
in  this  process,  is  mixed  with  20  to  30%  of  activated  sludge,  which  contains  a  large 
concentration  of  highly  active  aerobic  micro-organisms,  which  increases  the  rate  of 
decomposition.   

•  The ASP unit basically consists of CSTR (Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor), which is 

an aeration basin equipped with surface aerators and secondary clarifier unit.  
•  The aerobic bacteria culture is developed in the reactor and remain i n suspension.  

Monod Model 

Monod  Kinetics is used for microbial growth calculations and reactor  sizing in the activated 
sludge process.   

The pertinent equations are  rg  = dX/dt =μ X=   [μmax {S /(Ks + S)}]X ,  

where the terms have the usual meanings. S, substrate Conc, X, microbe conc. 

The diagram below shows how Ks is determined from μmax .   Monod's equation is an empirical 
equation to determine rg ,  the growth rate of microbes. 

 
Wastewater treatment flow diagram 

Reactor Configuration 

In environmental engineering, particularly in water & waste water treatment reactors  used 
are of 3 types –  

 i) Batch Reactor (BR) 

ii) Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) 

iii) Plug Flow Reactor (PFR) 

i) Batch Reactor  (BR) 

 
 
In this case, the reactants  or inputs enter into the reactor,  remain for desired time &  then 
discharged. 

Ex:- BOD test 

ii) Continuously Stirred Tank  Reactor  (CSTR) 

In this case, reactants  continuously enter into the reactor  &  the products are  continuously 
discharged from a well-mixed vessel. 

Ex:- Waste water treatment 

 
 
 
iii) Plug Flow Reactor (PFR) 

In this case, the reactants or inputs are entered at one end & products are discharged at the 
other end, after spending a minimum retention time in the system. 

Ex:- mixing of pollutant in river flow 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Module  – 3: ATMOSPHERIC  CHEMISTRY, 
SOIL CHEMISTRY, GROUND WATER 
RECHARGE, NOISE SOURCE & ABATEMENT 

Soil Chemistry 

The order of 10  most abundant elements in soil & crustal rocks are  –  

In soil: 

O > Si > Al > Fe > C > Ca > K > Na > Mg > Ti 

In Crustal rock:  

O > Si > Al > Fe > Ca > Mg = Na > K > Ti > P  

Soil minerals 

The most common soil minerals are –  

Quartz - SiO2 

Calcite - CaCO3 

Gypsum - CaSO4.2H2O 

Gibbsite - Al(OH)3 

Soil Salinity 

A  soil solution is considered saline, if  the electrical  conductivity  (EC)  is  greater  than  4000 
micro-siemens/cm or µs/cm. This condition occurs, when evaporation exceeds precipitation. 
If this condition continues then, saltpan will occur. 

General Composition of soil 

1)Inorganic or Mineral matter–45% (Ca,Mg etc.) 

2) Organic matter – 5% (Humus) 

3) Soil water – 25% 

4) Soil air – 25% 

Types of soil in India 

1. Red soil 

2. Black soil 

3. Mountainous soil  

4. Desert soil 

5. Alluvial soil (fine grained fertile soil present in river bed)  

Elemental properties of soil in relation to infiltration 

1. Bulk Density or Dry Density (ρb)  

    = Md/Vt = Dry mass of soil/Total volume of soil 

2. Particle Density(ρm) = Md/Vd = Dry mass of soil/Dry volume of soil  

3. Porosity(φ)= (Va+Vw)/Vs = (Volume of air + Volume of water)/Volume of soil  

4. The water content (ϴ) = Vw/Vs = Volume of water/ Volume of soil                                  

5. Degree of saturation(s): - It is a measure of wetness. 

    So, S = Vw/(Va+Vw) = (Vw/Vs)/[(Va+Vw)]/Vs = ϴ/ φ  

Soil Moisture Deficit (SMD)  

The Soil Moisture Deficit is the term used when soil moisture is below the Field Capacity (FC) 
of soil. 

Field Capacity  (FC)  

It  is the maximum % of  volumetric soil moisture that  a  soil sample will hold freely against 
earth gravity. It varies from 5% for sandy soil to 30% for dry soil. 

Atmospheric Chemistry 

Primary Pollutant 

The Primary Pollutants are those which are emitted by identifiable manmade sources.  

Ex:- SOX, NOX,CO 

Secondary Pollutant 

The secondary pollutants are those formed in the atmosphere by chemical or photochemical 
reactions of primary pollutants. 

Ex:- Acid rain, Photochemical Smog 

Photochemical smog  

It is basically the product of HC(Hydrocarbon) + NOx + Sunlight 

PAN 

PAN is a class of compounds, Peroxy- Acyl- Nitrates, that are formed by photochemical 
reactions at the ground level.  It is a key ingredient of SMOG, is a respiratory inhibitor and an 
eye irritant.  The commonest PAN is Peroxy-Acetyl- Nitrate. 

reactions 

involving  PAN 

totally  well 
formation  are 
The 
understood.   However, the  equations below  give  a  rough  pathway  to  the  photochemical 
formation of PAN compounds. 

complex, and  not 

PANs are secondary pollutants which are present in photochemical smog. PANs are 
not directly emitted as exhaust from power plants or internal combustion engines, but they 
are  formed  from  other  pollutants  by  chemical  reactions  in  the  atmosphere. Free  radical 
reactions catalyzed by UV light from the sun oxidize unburned hydrocarbons to  aldehydes, 
ketones &  dicarbonyl compounds  whose secondary reactions  create  peroxyacyl (the most 
common  is  the  peroxyacetyl)  radicals,  which  combine  with  the  NO2 radical  to  form 
Peroxyacylnitrates (PANs); if the  radical  is  peroxyacetyl, then peroxyacetylnitrate (PAN) is 
formed.  

The reactions involved, in a simplified manner, are as follows: 

•  NO2  +  hv ------->   NO  +  O 
• 
 O  +  O2   --------->   O3 
• 
 O3  +  NO -------->   NO2 +  O2 

When the nascent oxygen combines with hydrocarbon (i.e. HC or RC), then acyl radicals, RCO, 
are formed: 

• 

    RC  +  O  ---------->   RCO 

Then these acyl radicals combine with oxygen molecule to form peroxy-acyl radicals  

•  RCO + O2 -----> RCO3                                                                                            

and finally, peroxy-acyl radicals RCO3 combine with NO2 to form RCO3NO2. 

•  RCO3  +  NO2  ---------->  RCO3NO2 ,  a peroxy-acyl nitrate 

If R is CH3 (methyl group) then, CH3COOONO2 or  C2H3NO5 (peroxy-acetyl nitrate) is formed, 
which is called PAN. 

Vertical Temperature Profile of earth’s atmospheric Region 

There are basically four regions are there. 

•  Troposphere – 0-12  km 
•  Stratosphere – 12-50  km 
•  Mesosphere – 50-80  km 
•  Thermosphere – 80-700  km 

•  The Troposphere  is mostly heated by transfer of energy from the earth surface and 

• 

• 
• 

temperature decreases with altitude or height.  
In Stratosphere temperature increases with height due to increased absorption of UV  
radiation by Ozone Layer. 
In Mesosphere temperature decreases with height due to decreasing solar heating. 
In  Thermosphere  temperature  increases  with  height  due  to  absorption  of  highly 
energetic solar radiation which causes atmosphere particles in this layer to become 
electrically charged.   

Criteria Pollutants 

The  criteria  pollutants  as  defined  by  USA,  EC(European  Community)  &  WHO  includes 
CO,NO2,SO2,Pb,PM-10(Particulate Matter of dia less than 10µm). These are generally found 
in urban environment. 

Non-Criteria Pollutants 

The non-criteria air pollutants are those for  which emission limits from industry are set or 
fixed. These are more poisonous & hazardous w.r.t. criteria pollutants. 

Ex:- Benzene(C6H6),Carbon disulphide(CS2), Arsenic, Asbestos 

 
 
Acid Deposition 

Normal clean rain has a pH  value of between 5.0  and  5.5,  which is slightly acidic. However, 
when rain combines with sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides which are produced from power 
plants  and  automobiles  the rain becomes  much  more acidic.  Typical acid  rain has  a pH 
value of 4.0. 

Hydrocarbon  (HC), SOX, NOX emitted from industries & vehicles are the main source of acid 
deposition on the earth. 

GHG (Green House Gases) 

A  GHG  absorbs  &  emits  radiation  within  the  thermal  infrared  range  having  wavelength 
between 700nm to 1mm i.e.700x10-9 m to 10-3m. The major GHG in order of their contribution 
are CO2>CFCs>CH4>N2O(Nitrous  Oxide) 

Air Pollution Meteorology 

The meteorological factors are – 

•  Wind speed & direction 
•  Temperature & humidity 
•  Turbulence  
•  Atmospheric Stability 
•  Topographic effects on meteorology 

Scales 

Air pollution emission can be measured in 3 scales- 

a) Microscale 

b) Mesoscale 

c) Macroscale  

a) Microscale 

It is of the order of 1km & duration is minutes to hours. 

Ex:- Chimney gases 

b) Mesoscale 

It is of the order of 100km  & duration is hours to days. 

Ex:- Mountain valley wind  

c) Macroscale 

It is of the order of 1000km  & duration is days to weeks. 

Ex:- wind over oceans & continents 

Wind Speed 

Wind speed at any height(z) can be determined using power law relationship i.e.  

UZ=U10(Z/Z10)P 

Where, 

UZ is wind speed at height Z mtr 

U10  is wind speed at 10mtr  height 

Z is height in mtr 

Z10  is 10  mtr height 

P is exponent depends on terrain & stability class  

Q. Use power law velocity profile equation to determine U20,U50,U100,U200 if U10 is 5m/sec & p 
is 0.2. 

Lapse Rate 

In  the  lower  troposphere,  the  temperature  usually  decreases  with  altitude.  The  rate  of 
temperature change or  gradient  is known as  the lapse rate. Lapse  rate  can  be ambient or 
adiabatic. 

Ambient Lapse Rate (ALR) or Environmental Lapse Rate (ELR) 

The temperature change or gradient with respect to rising altitude is known as ambient lapse 
rate & it varies from day to day & day to night. This is the actual change of temperature with 
altitude for the stationary atmosphere. 

Adiabatic Lapse Rate 

The temperature change of a  parcel  of air against  rising altitude under adiabatic condition 
(i.e. occurring without the addition or loss of heat) is called the adiabatic lapse rate.  

Adiabatic Lapse Rate can be of two types- 

i) Dry  Adiabatic Lapse Rate(DALR) 
ii) Moist adiabatic  lapse rate (MALR) or Saturated  adiabatic lapse rate(SALR) 

For dry air i.e. DALR value is 0.980C  per 100mtr  or approximately 10C per 100mtr  or 100C  per 
KM height. 

For moist air i.e. MALR value is 0.550C  per 100mtr  or approximately 0.60C  per 100mtr  or 60C 
per KM height.  

Pasquill – Gifford stability classes 

Atmospheric Dispersion 

For determining atmospheric dispersion, generally 5 models are used like –  

•  Gaussian model 
•  Numerical model 
•  Statistical model 
•  Emperical model 
•  Physical model  

Out of the above models, Gaussian model is generally used. 

The various assumptions of Gaussian model are –  

i) There is no variation in wind speed & direction between the source & receptor.  

ii) All discharges remain in the atmosphere. 

iii) Dispersion doesn’t occur in the downward direction. 

iv) Emission rates are assumed constant & continuous.    

Equipment Selection & Design 

The Equipment Selection & Design is made on the basis of the types of compounds which are 
required to be removed. Generally, compounds can be of three types – 

a) Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) 

b) Inorganic Compounds 

c) Particulate matter 

The major types of equipments which are used are –  

i) Incinerators 

ii) Absorbers 

iii) Adsorbers 

iv) Condensors 

v) Filters 

vi) Scrubbers or wet collectors- 

It is an apparatus using water or solution for purifying gases or vapours 

vii) Various particle collection devices like ESP (Electrostatic Precipitator)  

viii) Impingement separators- 

By density difference, it separates solids from gases 

ESP (Electrostatic Precipitator) 

An electrostatic  precipitator (ESP) is a  highly efficient filtration device that removes 
fine  particles,  like  dust  and  smoke,  from  a  flowing  gas  using  the  force  of  an  induced 
electrostatic charge minimally impeding the flow of gases through the unit.  

Basic Working Principle of ESP 

In high- voltage electrostatic field, affected by the electric field force, gas ionization 
takes place. There are tremendous amount of electrons and ions existing in the ioni zed gas. 
After the dust particles are combined with these electrons and ions, they will be polarized, 
most of them are negatively polarized. Under the action of the field force, negatively charged 
particles migrates towards the positive electrode and in turn release electrons and attach to 
the positive electrode. 

When the particles agglomerate and the layers reach a certain thickness on the plate, rapping 
system  will start  to  work  and  the  particles  will be  dislodged from  the  collecting plate by 
vibration and falling into the hopper. That ends the collection process. 

The efficiency of an ESP with plate collector is given by Anderson-Deutsch equation which can 

be expressed as follows- 

Efficiency = 1- e(-AW/Q)  

where,  

A = area of the plates in square mtr 

W= particle sedimentation velocity in an electric field in mtr/sec 

Q= Gas flow rate in m3/sec 

Q.  A  quantity of  50  m3/sec  of  air  flows from  a  cement  manufacturing  facility. It  contains 
cement particles whose settling velocity is 0.12 mtr/sec. If 99% removal ef ficiency is required, 
calculate the surface area of the ESP or design an ESP. 

Q. Calculate the percentage increase in area of the ESP plates, if the efficiency of the ESP unit 
is to be increased from 99%  to 99.7%.  Given the flow rate is 50m3/sec & particulate velocity 
is 0.15mtr/sec. 

Q. The drift velocity of fly ash particle is given by the empirical equation w= 1.5X105  dp, where 
dp is particle size. Determine the plate area  required to remove particles of dia 0.7µm  with 
removal efficiency 95%. Flow to ESP is 5m3/sec.  

Noise Pollution 

Sounds are mechanical waves of pressure which allow us to hear & listen. Sounds can 
be  transmitted  through  solid,  liquid &  gas.  Generally  human  beings  can  perceive  sound 
frequencies between 20 Hz & 20  KHz.   

Noise is a sound, that is loud, unpleasant, unexpected or undesired. 

 
Sounds, particularly loud ones, that disturb people or make it difficult to hear wanted sounds, 
are called noise. Noise is a subset of sound.   

Sources of Noise Pollution 

Sources can be classified into outside & inside. Outside include construction sites, road traffic, 
airport, factories etc. Inside include phones, tv, radio, home appliances etc.  

Main source is urbanization & increasing population 

Source 
Normal conversation 
Alarm Clock 
Car horn 
Jet  
Gunshot 
Rocket Launching   

      Sound in dB 
60 
80 
120 
130 
140 
180 

Effects of Noise Pollution 

Lack of productivity 

•  Sleep disturbance 
• 
•  Causes stress & depression 
•  Hormone imbalance 
•  Higher heart rate 

Noise Control or Attenuation 

Noise has following medium. 

Source→Transmission Path →Receiver 

The acoustic treatment of above three can help in attenuation. 

Ways to reduce Noise Pollution 

•  Wear ear plugs 
•  Avoid using multiple appliances at a time 
•  Keep vehicles & machines in proper condition 
•  Buildings  can  be  designed  with  suitable  noise  absorbing  material  for  the  walls, 

windows, and ceilings.  

•  Social awareness programs should be taken up to educate the public about the causes 

and effects of noise pollution.  

Physical Properties of Sound 

The various physical properties of sound are – 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Amplitude(A)- Amplitude is maximum or minimum pressure. 

•  Wavelength(λ)- Wavelength is the distance between successive crest or trough. 

•  Time Period (T or P)- Time period is the time gap between successive crest or trough 

•  Frequency(f)- Frequency is the number of complete pressure variations or cycles per 

second. 

•  Speed of sound(c)- Speed of sound is 340m/sec. 

Noise Criteria 

The various noise criteria can be – 

• 

• 

• 

LAeq (Equivalent Continuous Level) 

LAE (Sound Exposure Level) 

LAN (Sound Level Exceeded for N% of time) 

Indian Standard  for ambient noise level 

Area code 

      Area                        Daytime         Nighttime 

      A           Industrial Area  

75dB               70dB 

      B 

       Commercial Area            65dB        

55dB 

      C 

       Residential Area              55dB                45dB 

      D              Silence Zone  

50dB               40dB 

The above values are of LAeq.  

Inverse Square Law of sound Propagation 

It states that, the sound intensity(I) is inversely proportional to the square of the distance (r) 
it propagates. 

I = W/4πr2 i.e. 

I α 1/r2,  

where,  

W is Sound power of noise source in watt.  

The sound power level is measured in decibel(dB) i.e. 

LW=10  log(W/10-12) 

     
      
where, 

LW is sound power level in dB for 10-12  watt & W is sound power of noise source in watt. 

The sound pressure level is measured in decibel(dB) & is directly proportional to the square 
of sound pressure i.e. 

LP=10log{P2/(P0)2}  

   = 20  log (P/P0) 

Where, 

LP is sound pressure level in dB, 

P is measured pressure in Pascal &  

P0 is reference pressure = 20μPa  

Q. The sound from a voice shouting source is 0.001W.  What is the sound power level? 

Q.If a sound source has a pressure of 2000μPa  at 10mtr  distance, calculate 

a) Sound Pressure Level in dB 

b) Sound Intensity in Watt/m2 

c) Sound Power in Watt. 

Q.If two sound sources have equal pressure of 2000μPa,  then determine the sound pressure 
in dB. 

Q.  An air  conditioner generates a  noise level of 75dB  for five minutes in every hour.  If the 

background noise level is 55dB, then calculate the LAeq. 

 
 
 
 
Module  – 4: SOLID WASTE, HAZARDOUS 
WASTE & E-WASTE MANAGEMENT 

Solid Waste Management 

Solid  waste  is  the  unwanted  or  useless solid materials  generated  from  combined 

residential, industrial and commercial activities in a given area.  

Management of solid waste reduces or eliminates adverse impacts on the environment and 
human health and supports economic development and improved quality of life.  

It may be categorised according  to its origin (domestic, industrial, commercial, construction 
or institutional); according to its contents (organic materials like plastics, rubber, food items 
& inorganic materials like glass, metal etc); or according to hazard potential (toxic, non-toxic, 
flammable, radioactive, infectious etc).  

A number of processes are involved in effectively managing waste for a municipality.  

•  These include monitoring, collection, transport, processing, recycling and disposal.  

The order or hierarchy of solid waste management includes –  

i) Waste prevention & minimization 

ii) Reuse & Recycling 

iii) Transformation 

iv) Landfill  

Reuse 

A newly purchased product is put to another use after the first use is completed.  

Recycling 

It  is  the  processing  of  used  materials  or  waste  into  new  products  to  prevent  waste  of 
potentially useful materials. 

Properties of MSW (Municipal Solid Waste) 

The various properties of MSW  includes – 

i) Physical Properties of MSW 

ii) Biological Properties of MSW 

iii) Chemical & Energy Properties of MSW 

i) Physical Properties of MSW 

The various Physical Properties of MSW  are – 

a) Particle Size Distribution 

b) Density & Moisture Content 

c) Field Capacity 

d) Shear Strength 

e) Hydraulic Conductivity 

a) Particle Size Distribution 

Particle size is measured in terms of size of screens in mm through which wastes are passing. 
This distribution will provide the information of various materials present. 

b) Density & Moisture Content 

Density is mass  per unit  volume, which is a  useful physical parameter  used for  separating 
various wastes from each other before treatment. 

The moisture content is expressed as mass of water vapour per unit mass of substance. 

Moisture Content (%) = {(a-b)/a}X100 

Where,  

‘a’ is initial mass of sample &  

‘b’ is mass of sample after drying 

c) Field Capacity (FC) 

It is the maximum percentage of volumetric soil moisture that a MSW sample will hold freely 
against earth’s gravity. 

FC can be calculated by – 

FC = 0.6  – 0.55{W/(4500+W)} 

Where,  

W is overburden weight in Kg. 

d) Shear Strength 

Solid wastes when compacted  usually have high  shearing strength &  hence don’t  flow on 
standing, but sludge has poor shearing strength & therefore very often sludge is co-disposed 
with MSW. 

e) Hydraulic Conductivity 

Sludge in landfills tend to resist the movement of water through them due to low hydraulic 
conductivity, as sludge has high moisture content. 

ii) Biological Properties of MSW 

Organic or biological matter in MSW is significant for the energy recovery by biodegradation.  

Biodegradation can be accomplished either by aerobic or anaerobic process.  

The biodegradability of the organic fraction of MSW is given by – 

BF = 0.83  - 0.028LC 

Where,  

BF is Biodegradable Fraction 

LC is Lignin(organic) Content in % of dry weight 

High LC will give low biodegradability. 

iii) Chemical & Energy Properties of MSW 

The various steps involved in this are – 

a) Proximate Analysis 

b) Ultimate Analysis 

c) Energy Content 

a) Proximate Analysis 

It  deals  with  the  determination  of  moisture  content(W%),  volatile  matter(VM%),  non -
combustible fraction (i.e. ash%) & Fixed Carbon(FC). 

FC can be found out by – 

FC=100  - W(%) - VM(%) - ash(%) 

FC is the solid combustible residue that remains after the material is heated &  the volatile 
matter is ejected. 

b) Ultimate Analysis 

It is the elemental analysis of essential major elements like C,H,O,N,P,S in percentage mass.  

c) Energy Content 

Heating value or calorific value of MSW  may be defined as the amount of heat liberated in 
calorie, when a gram of MSW  is burnt. It gives the amount of organic matter present in the 
MSW. 

Generally, terms like E, Hu, Hwf, Hawf are used to express energy content. 

E is Energy Content 

Hu is LHV(Lower Heat Value) i.e. energy received from waste as collected from site  

Hwf is NHV(Normal Heat Value) i.e. energy received from water-free waste 

Hawf is HHV(Higher Heat Value) i.e. energy received from ash-water-free waste  

Hu = Hawf x B – 2.445  x W 

Where,  

B is flammable fraction or combustible component  

W is moisture content fraction or water content  

The energy content of MSW  can be determined from following equations –  

i) Dulong Equation 

ii) Khan Equation  

i) Dulong Equation 

Hawf =337(C  )+1419{(H)-0.125(O)}  +93(S)  +23(N) 

Where, C, H, O, S, N are the % by weight of each element present in the material. 

ii) Khan  Equation 

E= 0.051{F  + 3.6(CP)} + 0.352(PLR) 

Where,  

E = Energy content, 

F = % of food material by weight 

CP = % of Cardboard & Paper by weight 

PLR = % of Plastic & Rubber by weight  

Separation of MSW 

The different major components of MSW  must be separated from one & the other in order 
to have suitable management of MSW.  

The component separation can be done at the household or at the industry i.e. at the source 
or at the transfer station or at the final destination, where mechanical sorting or separation 
is possible. 

Storage & Transport  of MSW 

It depends on types of collection facility available & materials present, which can be – 

i) Door Step Collection 

ii) Regular Roadside Collection 

iii) Dustbins at market places 

iv) Community Recycle bin  

Integrated Waste Management 

The ideal integrated waste management plan might have following priorities –  

i) Minimize all components of waste fraction. 

ii) Recycle paper, cardboard, non-ferrous metals. 

iii) Reuse plastics, ferrous metals, glass.  

iv) Compost food fraction of MSW. 

v) Incinerate the remaining food waste. 

vi) Landfill the remaining after proper treatment.  

Land fill vs Open Dump 

A Sanitary Landfill is a carefully engineered tract of land, designed by engineers. The 
system consists of a  large excavated area  in the ground,  with a  thick lining of  plastic over 
which there is a  compacted  clay  liner. The  bottom  of the  pit also  has  a  liner that  helps in 
preventing the liquid waste (that comes out from the solid waste mostly if rainwater is soaked 
in the  landfill) from leaking through, as  it could  contaminate the water  supply. This liquid 
waste that gets collected is called leachate. The compacted garbage (or refuse) is then added 
to the landfill in the form of organized layers (layers of garbage alternating with layers of soil).  

This  is  done  for  the  elimination of  any  unpleasant  odors  and  to  expedite the rotting  or 
decomposition process. When the landfill is fully covered, it is further sealed by a  layer of 
compacted clay. Moreover, a gas (methane) is often produced as the waste deteriorates due 
to which a  system is required to collect and pump it. If this is not managed effective ly, the 
methane gas can explode. The methane collected can be utilized to generate electricity.  

In most  Western Countries, there are  different types of landfills, mainly depending on the 
nature  of waste  materials.   A  landfill is built for  each  of  the garbage  types like household 
waste, hazardous chemicals or radioactive waste, construction waste, etc. 

An open dump, as the name suggests, is an open area typically outside city limits where the 
garbage is dumped; this usually results in very unhygienic conditions and often pollutes the 
groundwater nearby, from toxic chemicals leaching into the groundwater. 

Leachate in Landfills 

Leachate  is  the  contaminated  water  in  landfills which  arrive  at  the  landfill site  through 
external precipitation. 

The amount of leachate produced in a landfill depends on it’s water balance, which can  be 
expressed as follows –  

LC = PR + SRT  – SRO  – EP – ST  

 
Where,  

LC is Leachate, 

PR is Precipitation 

SRT is Surface Run To i.e. water outside the site entering the landfill  

SRO is Surface Run-off 

EP is Evapotranspiraton 

ST is Change in water storage 

Q.  Calculate the Landfill area  requirement for  20  years for  a  city  of population of  about  5 
lakhs. Assume MSW generation as 500gm  per capita per day & density of MSW  is 500kg/m 3. 

Hazardous Waste Management 

Hazardous  waste is  defined as,  any  waste  which because  of  it’s physical, chemical 
quality, quantity and infectious characteristics can cause significant hazards to human health 
or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed. 

A substance is hazardous, if it exhibits one or more of the following characteristics.  

i) Ignitable:- The substance causes or enhances fire. 

ii) Reactive:- The substance reacts with other materials & may explode.  

iii) Corrosive:- The substance destroys tissues or metals. 

iv) Toxic:- The substance is a danger to health, water, food & air. 

Hazardous Category              Nature of Waste 
Explosive 
Oxidiser 
Highly Flammable 
Flammable 
Irritant 
Harmful 

H1                                    
H2 
H3A 
H3B 
H4 
H5 

Generation of Hazardous  Waste 

Industry Type   
Battery 
 Electroplating  
Printing 
Textiles  

Hazardous Substances 
Cd, Pb, Ag, Zn 
Co,Cr,Cu,Zn 
As,Cr, Cu,Pb,Se 
Cr, Cu, Organics 

  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
Medical Hazardous Wastes 

These  are  the  wastes  generated  from  hospitals, medical  colleges, nursing  homes,  clinical 
laboratories & operation theatres etc. 

Medical hazardous wastes include – 

i) Expired or Obsolete medicines 

ii) Infectious dressing materials 

iii) Pathological wastes from medical laboratories & operation theatres 

iv) Wastes from dental clinics etc. 

Household Hazardous  Waste 

The household hazardous wastes come from kitchen, bathroom, garage, garden etc.  

It may include – 

i)Used or Exhausted batteries 

ii)Chemicals like dyes, perfumes 

iii)Pesticides, herbicides, used oils, lubricants etc. 

Transportation  of Hazardous  Waste 

The data or information required for Transportation of Hazardous Waste are  – 

i) Waste Generator 

ii) Composition of Waste 

iii) Physical Appearance 

iv) Method of Packaging  

v) ADR/RID classification 

ADR means transport of dangerous goods by road 

RID means transport of dangerous goods by rail 

vi) UN Number(United Nation Number) 

ADR/RID  classification 

Class  
 1a 

Item Description 
Explosive Items 

 
 
Items loaded with explosives 
 Detonators & similar types of goods 
 Gases, Compressed, Condensed or  

 1b 
 1c 
  2 
                            dissolved under pressure  
  3 

Flammable Liquids 

UN Number (United Nation Number) 

The UN  numbers range  from  UN0001  to  about  UN3500  and  are  assigned  by  the United 
Nations Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods. 

UN Number 
     1001   
     1002   
     1003   
     1005 

Hazardous Item 
Acetylene Dissolved 
Compressed Air 
Liquefied air, refrigerated 
NH3, dry, liquefied 

Treatment of Hazardous  waste 

i) Thermal Treatment (Incineration) 

ii) Chemical Treatment (Neutralization) 

iii) Physical Treatment (Filtration, Flocculation) 

iv) Disposal (Secure Landfill) 

Incineration 

Incineration can  be  defined as  controlled high  temperature oxidation of  primarily organic 
compounds to produce CO2 & H2O with non-objectionable by-products. 

3 T’s of Incineration 

i) Time  

ii) Temperature 

iii) Turbulence 

i) Time  

Adequate residence time for solids for complete destruction or breaking of bonds. It depends 
on feed rate, incinerator dimension & rotation speed. 

ii) Temperature  

High enough temperature is required for destruction of hazardous waste. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii) Turbulence 

Sufficient turbulence with  adequate  air  or  oxygen  for  mixing of  waste  with  oxygen.  This 
depends on rotation speed & incinerator types. 

Types of Incinerator 

i) Rotary Kiln  

ii) Liquid injection  

iii) Plasma Arc Destruction 

iv) Wet Air Oxidation 

V) Fluidized Bed Combustion  

i) Rotary  Kiln 

This is most common type of incinerator. Here Chemical destruction of waste occurs. 

ii) Liquid injection 

This is for treating liquid organic waste. 

iii) Plasma Arc Destruction 

In this case, electric arc of very high temperature is used. 

iv) Wet Air Oxidation 

It is an aqueous phase oxidation where materials are exposed to gaseous source of oxygen. 

v) Fluidized Bed Combustion 

This is suitable for uniform types of waste. In this case, heat transfer is very fast & uniform.  

Rotary kiln incinerator 

A  rotary  kiln  incinerator  is  typically  a  slightly  inclined  rotating  cylinder,    with 
dimensions around 2 m in diameter and 10 m long,  on a pilot plant scale.  There is a firebrick 
or refractory lining inside the cylinder.  The kiln can handle all sorts of wastes and hazardous 
wastes  including solids,  liquids, sludges  and  gases.   Partially  combusted  gases  are  often 
passed through a secondary combustion chamber for complete combustion.    By the nature 
of its design and construction, the three Ts of combustion are adhered here - good contact or 
residence time, fair degree of turbulence, and operating at a  high enough temperature.  A 
schematic diagram is below : 

DRE (Destruction & Removal Efficiency) 

Destruction and removal efficiency (DRE) is the efficiency of the unit (kiln) in destruction and 
removal of a particular targeted organic compound. 

In incineration DRE of above 99% is required. 

DRE can be calculated by using the following formula –  

DRE=  {(Win – Wout)/Win} x 100 

Where, 

Win is mass feed rate of specific organic component to the incinerator 

Wout  is mass emission rate of same organic component from the incinerator 

CE(Combustion Efficiency) 

Combustion efficiency is a measurement of how well the fuel being burned or is being utilized 
in the combustion process. 

CE can be calculated by using the following formula – 

CE = {(CCO2 – CCO)/CCO2} x 100 

Where, 

CCO2 is concentration of CO2 in the emitted gas 

 
CCO is concentration of CO in the emitted gas 

Q.  Find  out  CE(Combustion  Efficiency)  &  DRE(Destruction  &  Removal  Efficiency)  of  an 
incinerator from the following data – 

i) Input of phenolic waste is 18.2%  & outlet phenol is 0.04% 

ii) Outlet gas concentration of CO is 0.1% & CO2 is 25.7%   

E-Waste Management 

E-  waste or  Electrical/Electronics waste is an  environment killer. Today’s  electronic 

gadgets, tomorrow’s electronic wastes. 

'E-waste' means waste from electrical and electronic equipments; whole or in part or rejects 
from their manufacturing and repair process which are intended to be discarded as waste.  

E-waste is the term used to cover all items of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) an d 
its parts that have been discarded by its owner as waste without the intent of re -use.  

It is also referred to as WEEE  (Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment) or electronic waste 
or e-scrap in different regions. 

Electronic  waste  or  e-waste  describes  discarded  electrical  or  electronic  devices  &  used 
electronics which are destined for reuse, resale, recycling, or disposal are also considered e -
waste. 

Informal processing of  e-waste in developing countries can  lead to  adverse human  health 

effects and environmental pollution. 

It is the fastest growing portion of municipal waste & its management will prevent -  

•  Pollution of ground water.  
•  Acidification of soil.  
•  Emission of toxic fumes and gases.  
•  Release of harmful gases into the air. 

Sources/Types of E-Waste 

1. Waste generated from the products used for data processing such as computers, computer 
devices like monitor, speakers, keyboards, printers etc.  

2. Electronic devices used for entertainment like TV, DVDs, and CD players.  

3. Equipment or devices used for communication like phones, landline phones, fax etc. 

4.  Household  equipment’s like vacuum  cleaner, microwave  ovens,  washing  machines, air 
conditioners etc.  

5. Audio, visual components such as VCRs, Stereo equipment etc.  

Components of E-Waste 

EEE contains various materials including hazardous, valuable and scarce metals.  

Common  hazardous  materials found  in e-waste are  heavy metals  (such  as  mercury,  lead, 
cadmium etc.) 

E-Waste also contains many valuable materials (such as iron, copper, aluminum and plastics) 
and precious metals (like gold, silver, platinum and palladium) that can be recycled.  

In fact, up to 60  elements from the periodic table can be found in complex electronics, and 
many of them are recoverable, though it is not always economic to do so presently.  

From the resource perspective, e-waste is a potential “urban mine” that could provide a great 
amount of secondary resources for remanufacture and recycling. 

E-Waste Composition (Approx.) 

•  Monitors - 10%  , 
•  Television -10%,  
•  Computers,Televisions, Fax, Printers etc.-15% , 
•  DVD/VCR Player, CD Player, Radio etc.- 15% , 
•  Refrigerators -20% , 
•  Washing Machine, Dryers, AC, Vacuum Cleaners etc.- 30% 

Is E-Waste hazardous? 

E-Waste  in itself is  not  hazardous.  However, the hazardous  constituents present in  t he e-
waste render it hazardous & when such wastes are dismantled & processed, they pose hazard 
to health and environment. 

Reasons of E-waste generation 

•  Advancement in technology.  
•  Changes in style, fashion and status 
•  Products nearing the end of their useful life  
•  Not taking precautions while using them  

How E-Waste handled currently in India & across the world? 

Around  90%  of  the  e-waste  generated  in  India  are  handled  by  the  informal  sectors. 
Incineration & Landfilling are used currently for majority of e waste. 

Incineration i.e. E- Waste are destroyed by burning which produces harmful gases.  Land filling 
which often leads to contaminate water and soil. Very less percentage of e -waste is recycled 

RoHS and WEEE directives 

•  Companies  selling  electrical  and  electronic  goods  in  the  European  Union  must 
conform to the EU  legislation for electrical and electronic equipment (EEE). The two 
most important directives are: 

•  The Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE), which sets out  the 
responsibilities of EEE producers for the collection and recycling of their products at 
the end of their lifecycle. 

•  The Restriction  of  Hazardous  Substances  Directive  (RoHS),  which  bans  the  use  of 
certain hazardous substances (such as lead, mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium 
and some polybrominated flame retardants) in EEE. 

•  WEEE  and  RoHS  Directives are  complex pieces of legislation that apply to  a  similar 

range of products.  

•  Each  directive  imposes  obligations  and  outcomes  that  EU  Member  States  must 
achieve. However, neither directive dictates how the Member States must fulfill their 
obligations. Therefore, when exporting to Europe, U.S. exporters need to be mindful 
that national rules for implementing each directive will differ from country to country.  

Effects of e-waste on the environment 

Emissions from E-Waste create environmental damage. Toxic chemicals from e-waste enter 
the "soil-crop- food pathway,” and these are non-biodegradable and cause soil pollution. E-
Waste dumping yards and nearby places are polluted and cause health hazards. 

Effects of e-waste on human body 

Elements present in e-waste affect human body in various ways.  

Lead damage to central and peripheral nervous systems , blood systems and kidney damage 
and affects brain development of children.  

Chromium leads to asthmatic bronchitis & DNA damage. 

Cadmium   leads to toxic irreversible effects on human health &  accumulates in kidney and 
liver. causing neural damage 

Mercury leads to chronic damage to brain and respiratory system.  

Plastics  including  PVC  -  Burning  produces  dioxin  which  can  cause  reproductive  and 
developmental problems, Immune system damage & Interfere with regulatory hormones etc.  

Disposal of e-waste 

We should ensure safe disposal of these e-waste, because – 

1. Land fill disposal allows heavy metals to leach into ground water.  

2. Incineration makes hazardous materials pollute air.  

3. Disposal to water is dangerous and cause water and soil contamination. 

Methods of Recycling 

Disassembly/Dismantling 

It is the systematic removal of components , parts or a group of parts or a subassembly from 
a product in e-waste. 

Upgrading 

It includes comminuting(breaking) and separation of materials using mechanical/physical or 
metallurgical processing .  

Materials recovery 

The materials are recovered by recycling facilities. The plastic, glass, metals can be recovered 
by sorting them before mixing them with other waste.  

Advantages of recycling e-waste 

•  Assets recovery   
•  Reduction of need for landfills  
•  Resale and reuse  
•  Creation of jobs 
•  E waste has emerged as one of the fastest growing waste streams world wide today.  
• 
•  Reuse and Recycle are more beneficial than simple disposal.  

 Electronic gadgets, without proper disposal can cause environmental harm  

How to Dispose E-waste 

•  Donate working older equipment to schools colleges or government entities in need.  
• 
If computers are out of order then return it to the manufacturers. (HCL and Wipro in 
India has best take back service)  

•  Send waste goods to authorized recycling facility for proper disposal. 

Probable Solutions 

•  Need for stringent health standards and environmental protection laws in India  
•  Extended producer responsibility 
• 
Import of waste under license  
•  Producer-public-government cooperation 
•  Awareness program, following safer and efficient methods  
•  Choosing safer technology and cleaner substitute 
•  Monitoring of compliance rules  

•  Reduction of waste at source 
•  Recognition to the unorganized sectors in India. 
•  Designing of products using environment friendly raw items can make a change.  
•  Government should take steps to reduce e-waste disposal. 

E- Waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2011 

•  E- Waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2011  were notified in 2011  and had come 

• 

into force since 1st May, 2012.   
In order to ensure effective implementation of E-Waste Rules, Government of India 
modified the above one on 23.03.2016  which has been effective from 01-10-2016.   
•  These rules are applicable to every producer, consumer or bulk consumer, collection 
centre, dismantler and recycler of e-waste involved in the manufacture, sale, purchase 
and processing of electrical and electronic equipment or components 

•  Two categories of electrical and electronic equipment namely – 
• 
• 

(i) IT and Telecommunication Equipment and  
(ii) Consumer Electricals and Electronics such as TVs, Washing Machines, Refrigerators 
Air  Conditioners  including  fluorescent  and  other  mercury  containing  lamps  are 
covered under these Rules. 

Waste Minimization 

Waste minimization is necessary to - 

i) Control pollution 

ii) Decrease the depletion rate of resources 

iii) Increase efficiency & hence profitability  

Elements of a waste minimization strategy 

It includes – 

i) Reduction at source 

ii) Recycle/ Reuse 

iii) Treatment 

iv) Disposal 

 
 
 
Waste Minimization Hierarchy 

Waste Reduction Techniques 

It has four major categories. 

i) Inventory Management 

ii) Production Process Modification 

iii) Volume Reduction 

iv) Recovery 

i) Inventory Management 

Inventory means detailed list of articles, goods, property. 

Inventory management includes –  

a) Inventory Control 

b) Materials Control 

ii) Production  Process Modification 

 
It includes – 

a) Operational & maintenance procedures 

b) Materials Change 

c) Process equipment modification 

iii) Volume Reduction 

It includes – 

a) Source Segregation 

b) Concentration 

iv) Recovery 

It includes – 

a) on-site 

b) off-site 

Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 

LCA is an useful environmental management tool. 

Any product may have the following stages in it’s lifecycle – 

i) Raw material acquisition 

ii) Bulk material processing 

iii) Engineered & specialty materials production 

iv) Manufacturing & assembly 

v) Uses & services 

vi) Retirement or expired 

vii) Disposal 

Phases of LCA  

i) Planning 

ii) Screening 

iii) Data Collection 

iv) Data treatment 

v) Evaluation 

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is a process that requires consideration of the 
environment & public participation in the decision-making process of project development.  

Environmental  Impact  Assessment  (EIA)  is  an  important  management  tool  for  ensuring 
optimal use of natural resources for sustainable development.  

Origin of EIA 

All  ecosystems  including  human  beings  have  threshold  of  tolerance  for  pollution  & 
disturbances,  beyond  which  the  system  may  suffer  anything  from  temporary  upsets  to 
complete destruction. After second  world war  industrial &  agricultural practices  began  to 
cause environmental damage which crossed the thresholds & lead to origin of EIA.  

Stages of EIA 

The stages of EIA include – 

i) Screening 

ii) Scoping 

 
iii) EIS preparation 

iv) Review 

i) Screening 

By  screening,  it  is  to  be  decided  which  projects  should  be  subject  to  environmental 
assessment. 

ii) Scoping 

It  is the  process which defines the key  or  important issues that  should be included in  the 
environmental assessment.  

iii) EIS preparation 

It  is  the  scientific &  objective analysis  of  the  scale,  significance &  importance  of  impacts 
identified. 

iv) Review 

The review panel guides the study & then advises the decision makers. 

EIA Procedure 

There are generally three options for establishing EIA procedures. 

i) Legislative Option i.e. Legal approach 

ii) Middle Ground Option i.e. within accepted planning & Procedures 

iii) Policy Option i.e. within the administrative policy of government 

Project Screening for EIA 

The  success  of  EIA  depends on  effective coverage  &  application  of  projects.  The  various 
methods commonly used to select projects for EIA are –  

i) The use of positive (EIA required) & negative (EIA not required) list 

ii) The use of project criteria 

iii) The sensitive area criteria 

 
iv) Matrices 

v) Initial Environmental Evaluation(IEE) 

Initial Environmental Evaluation  (IEE) 

IEE  is  a  mini-EIA. It  requires a  description of  the  environment &  the  development &  the 
identification of environmental impacts those are anticipated. 

Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) 

EIS is a review document prepared for assessment in the EIA process. 

Scope Studies of EIS   

Scoping is the procedure for establishing the TOR (Terms Of Reference) for the EIS. In general, 
the objectives would be to identify the concerns & issues those need attention, necessary for 
public  involvement &  to  prepare  a  detailed report  for  the  investigation of  specific issues 
associated with the development. 

Preparation of an EIS 

One  of  the  important  elements of  any  project  is  the  preparation  of  documentation  to 
communicate the findings & conclusions of the study. 

The value of the project is sharply diminished, if it’s findings don’t reach it’s requisite results 
or intended audiences. 

The important points to be considered are – 

i) Planning  

ii) Purpose 

iii) Audience 

iv) Structure 

Review of an EIS 

The functions of the review authority includes-  

i) The scope of the assessment i.e. which projects should be subjected to a full or partial EIS.  

ii) General or specific guidelines & advice on the methods of EIS. 

iii) Formulate the TOR(Terms Of Reference) & initiate a detailed EIS. 

iv) Ensure that, the EIS had been adequately completed within the TOR.  

Module  – 5: ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS, 
LAWS AND HUMAN HEALTH 

Environmental Gradients 

The environment or environmental factors are  not similar over the globe or around 
the  earth,  giving rise to  Environmental Gradients  &  due  to  which  different species live in 
different places. 

The  physical, chemical factors  like light, temperature &  PH  are known  as  conditions  &  the 
factors the organism actually uses like food, water, shelter are known as resources. 

There is a global gradient change from the equator towards north or south. 

This is a  normally distributed bell-shaped curve, as the change in environmental conditions 
are gradual from equator towards north or south. This curve is best described by a Gaussian 
(Normal) Distribution function, of the form f(x)=e-x2.  

But, pollution can make it skew-shaped i.e. sharp decrease of curve towards left or right from 
range of optimum.  

 
 
 
Limiting Factors 

The resources in shortage of supply or the conditions over which the species has the smallest 
range of optimum will limit the species function & is called the limiting factor. 

Ex:- Plant growth is strongly correlated with rain, but in arid region sufficient light is available, 
but water scarcity is there which is the limiting factor. 

The tolerance of species to different environmental conditions or resources level vary from 
each other.  

The  favourable  environmental factors  to  a  species provide wide tolerance  curve  &  broad 
range of optimum known as Eurytopic factors. 

The  unfavourable  environmental factors  to  a  species provide  narrow  tolerance  curve  & 
narrow range of optimum known as Stenotopic factors. 

Regulatory Structure  of Indian Env. Laws 

• 

Central Govt. 

MOEF 

CPCB 

State Govt. 

State Dept. of Env. 

SPCB 

Regional Offices 

MoEF – Ministry of Environment & Forest, Government of India 

CPCB – Central Pollution Control Board 

SPCB – State Pollution Control Board 

Indian Env. Laws 

•  Water Laws 
•  Air Laws 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Wildlife & Forest Laws 
•  General Env. Laws 

Water Laws 

The various env. Laws on water are – 

1) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act – 1974 

2) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act rules – 1975   

 3) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Cess Act – 1977   

 4) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, rules & amendments – 1992   

Objectives of Water Law 

The objectives are –  

a) Prevention & control of water pollution 

b) Maintaining good quality of water 

c) Establishment of boards for the prevention & control of water pollution.   

Air Laws 

The various env. Laws on air are – 

1) The air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act – 1981 

2)The air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act rules – 1982   

3) Atomic Energy Act – 1982   

4) Motor Vehicles Act – 1988   

Objectives of Air Law 

The objectives are –  

a) Prevention & control of air pollution 

b) Maintaining good quality of air 

c) Establishment of boards for the prevention & control of air pollution 

Wildlife & Forest Laws 

The various env. Laws for wildlife & forest are-  

1) The wildlife protection act – 1972   

2) The wildlife protection act and amendments – 1991   

3) The forest conservation act – 1980 

4) The national forest policy – 1988   

Objectives of Wildlife & Forest Laws 

The Objectives are –  

a) Protection & conservation of wildlife 

b) To preserve biodiversity 

c) To maintain essential ecological processes & life supporting systems. 

General Env. Laws 

The various laws in this category are –  

1) The environmental protection act (EPA) – 1986  or Umbrella act 

2) Hazardous waste (management & handling) rules – 1989   

3) Biomedical waste (management & handling) rules – 1998   

Objectives of Umbrella act 

•  Protection  &  improvement  of  environment  &  prevention of  hazards  to  all  living 

creatures. 

•  Maintenance  of  harmonious  relationship  between  human  beings  &  their 

environment.   

National Green Tribunal (NGT) 

The Indian govt. established a National Green Tribunal in October 2010,  headed by a former 
judge of the supreme court. It is a tribunal exclusively dedicated to environmental issues. This 
body was established by an act of parliament i.e. National Green Tribunal Act of 2010, which 
will deal with all matters related to and arising out of environmental issues. 

Eco-labelling of products 

An eco-label is used to mark a consumer product to indicate that it is environment- friendly 
with regards  to its manufacture and  use. The label means that the product  satisfies certain 
eco-friendly criteria laid down by the govt. In1991,  the govt. of india launched its first eco -
label called Eco-mark for easy identification of environment-friendly products. 

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty  (CTBT) 

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty or CTBT bans nuclear explosive testing for everyone, 
everywhere, in all environments. CTBT makes very difficult for the countries to test or develop 
any nuclear weapon. 

Some Important  env. Laws 

1. London Law of Sea (1962)  is for prevention of sea pollution by oil.  

2.Stockholm Agreement (1972)  is for banning of ocean dumping wastes. 

3. Montreal Protocol (1987)  is for eliminating CFCs & other ozone depleting substances.  

4. Rio Summit (1992)  is with its objectives on sustainable development. 

Kyoto Protocol 

The  Kyoto  Protocol  (1992)  was  signed to  try  and  limit  Greenhouse gases,    based  on  the 
premise that Global Warming is occurring due to increased Greenhouse gas emissions.  

Paris Agreement 

The Paris Agreement of 2015  is  to combat  climate change and reduce the temperature rise 
to less than 2°C per century. 

Environmental Institutions in India 

1. TERI(Tata Energy Research Institute) established in1974. 

2. NEERI(National Environment Engineering Research Institute) established in1958.  

3. EPTRI(Environmental Protection Training and Research Institute) established in 1990.  

4. IIFM(Indian Institute of Forest Management) established in 1982. 

5. WII(Wildlife Institution of India) established in 1982 etc. 

Environmental movements in India 

1. Chipko movement started in 1973  to fight against deforestation. 

2.  Silent valley  movement   started  against  setting  up  of  a  75MW  hydroelectric project  to 
protect species of flora and fauna. 

3.  Narmada  Bachao  Andolan started against  a  multipurpose project over river narmada  by 
Baba Amte & Medha Patker. 

4. Baliyapal Movement started against acquiring cultivated lands for testing missiles etc.  

Important  Env. Data 

The idea of sustainable development was defined for the first time by the world commission 
on environment and development in the year-----  

•  1987 

World Wildlife Fund was founded in ---- 

•  1961 

Earth day is observed on ---- 

•  April 22. 

World environment day is celebrated every year on ----- 

•  5th June. 

First International Conference on environment was held on ---- 

• 

June,1972. 

Green Revolution 

The Green Revolution within India commenced in the early 1960s  that  led to an increase in 
food grain production, especially in Punjab, Haryana, and Uttar  Pradesh. Major milestones in 
this undertaking were the development of high-yielding varieties of wheat, and rust resistant 
strains of wheat. 

Environment & Human Health 

Env. Conditions Affecting Health 

i) Cleanliness of working area 

ii) Proper Lighting arrangement 

iii) Sufficient Temperature & Ventilation 

iv) Noise control 

V) Dust control 

Vi) Proper Working space & seating arrangements 

Factors  affecting Health 

Physical factors  like unhygienic living conditions, lack of education & overcrowding in small 
areas lead to health problems. 

Chemical factors  like improper or excess use of pesticides, herbicides and exposure to toxic, 
hazardous and radioactive substances lead to health problems. 

Climate changing factors 

Diseases of human and Their Control  

Interaction  of  the  agents  like micro-organisms  with the  hosts  like human  beings and  the 
environment can lead to various diseases.  

Following three factors  are important in this case.  

• 
• 
• 

sufficient strength of micro-organisms,  
lower immunity of the person &  
favouring environment for the transmission of agents  

Prevention can be done by -  

•  Enforcing immunization laws  
•  Providing health education to all 
• 

Implementing good hand washing procedures.   

Common Diseases 

•  Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver and often caused by viral infection. 
•  Typhoid is an acute illness associated with fever can be caused by bacteria salmonella 

typhi & spread to other people by contaminated water. 

•  Malaria  is  caused  by  a  parasite  called plasmodium which  is  transmitted to  human 

beings by the bite of infected female anopheles species mosquitoes.  

•  Dengue fever is an infection caused by dengue viruses. 

Role of IT in Env. & Human  Health 

• 

• 

IT or Information Technology, is one of the fastest growing recent technologies & as 
technology is advancing, the role of IT is increasing day by day. 
IT is used in the development & application of computational tools to acquire, store, 
organize, achieve, analyze & visualize various data which can be used for observation 
& protection of env. & human health. 

Role of IT in environment 

•  A large amount of information is easily available through remote sensing technology, 
GIS(Geographic Information System) & GPS(Global Positioning System) which can be 
used for various environmental purposes. 

•  This  data  and  knowledge  about  global  environment can  be  used  for  mapping  & 
monitoring  various  natural  resources,  thereby  helping  in  various  environmental 
studies. 

•  GIS helps in detecting the existence of species of flora & fauna & counting the numbers 

of animals like tiger, elephant etc. 

•  MoEF(Ministry  of  Env.  &  Forest)  &  GOI(Govt.  of  India)  have  established  ENVIS 
(Environmental Information System) in 1982  in different organizations for providing 
important information.  

Role of IT in Human  Health 

• 

• 

• 

IT  helps  in  the  development  of  biotechnology,  gene  engineering,  research  & 
developments in drug technologies. 
IT  plays a  major  role for a  better human health in the fields like bioinformatics and 
online medical transcription. 
IT  can  be  used  for  audio,  visual &  data  communications  for  medical  consultation, 
nursing & medical education. 
• 
IT helps in spreading awareness about endemic, epidemic & communicable diseases.  
•  Using Remote sensing & GIS, areas which are prone to diseases like malaria, dengue 
etc. can be identified & accordingly steps for prevention or spreading of these diseases 
can be taken.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: 

The courseware material  prepared may  contain  some text, figures  and diagrams  taken 
from google  images and other readily  available  web sources. The contents are prepared for the 
use of students  in Silicon  Institute  of Technology  as additional  reference material,  and not for 
any commercial  purpose. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
